                                                   5
                                 Perturbation theory




In this chapter, we introduce the analytical machinery to investigate the properties of many-body systems
perturbatively. Speciﬁcally, employing the “φ4 -theory” as an example, we learn how to describe systems
that are not too far from a known reference state by perturbative means. Diagrammatic methods are
introduced as a tool to eﬃciently implement perturbation theory at large orders. The new concepts are
then applied to the analysis of various properties of the weakly interacting electron gas.




In previous chapters we have emphasized repeatedly that the majority of many-particle
problems cannot be solved in closed form. Therefore, in general, one is compelled to
think about approximation strategies. One promising ansatz leans on the fact that, when
approaching the low-temperature physics of a many-particle system, we often have some
idea, however vague, of its preferred states and/or its low-energy excitations. One may
then set out to explore the system by using these prospective ground state conﬁgurations
as a working platform. For example, one might expand the Hamiltonian in the vicinity
of the reference state and check that, indeed, the residual “perturbations” acting in the
low-energy sector of the Hilbert space are weak and can be dealt with by some kind of
approximate expansion. Consider, for example, the quantum Heisenberg magnet. In dimen-
sions higher than one, an exact solution of this system is out of the question. However,
we know (or, more conservatively, “expect”) that, at zero temperature, the spins will be
frozen into conﬁgurations aligned along some (domain-wise) constant magnetisation axes.
Residual ﬂuctuations around these conﬁgurations, described by the Holstein–Primakoﬀ
boson excitations, or spin waves, discussed before can be described in terms of a controlled
expansion scheme. Similar programs work for countless other physical systems.
   These considerations dictate much of our further strategy. We will need to construct
methods to identify and describe the lowest-energy conﬁgurations of many-particle systems –
often called “mean-ﬁelds” – and learn how to implement perturbation theory around them.
In essence, the ﬁrst part of that program amounts to solving a variational problem, a
relatively straightforward task. However, the formulation of perturbation strategies requires
some preparation and, equally important, a good deal of critical caution (because many
systems notoriously defy perturbative assaults – a fact easily overlooked or misjudged!). We
thus turn the logical sequence of the two steps upside down and devote this chapter to an
introduction to many-body perturbation theory. This will include a number of applications,
i.e. problems where the mean-ﬁeld is trivial and perturbation theory on its own suﬃces to

                                                  193
194                                   Perturbation theory

produce meaningful results. Perturbation theory superimposed on non-trivial mean-ﬁelds
will then be the subject of the next chapter.


                  5.1 General structures and low-order expansions
As with any other perturbative approach, many-body perturbation theory amounts to an
expansion of observables in powers of some parameter – typically the coupling strength of
an interaction operator. However, before discussion of how this program is implemented in
practice, it is imperative to develop some understanding of the mathematical status of such
“series expansions.” (To motivate the point: it may, and often does, happen that the inﬁnite-
order expansion in the “small parameter” of the problem does not exist in a mathematical
sense!) This can be achieved by considering the following.


                                   An instructive integral
Consider the integral
                                     ∞    
                                       dx    1
                            I(g) =    √ exp − x2 − gx4 .                                  (5.1)
                                   −∞   2π   2
This can be regarded as a caricature of a particle subject to some harmonic potential
(x2 ) together with an “interaction” (x4 ). For small g  1, it seems natural to treat the
                                                                 
interaction perturbatively, i.e. to develop the expansion I(g) ≈ n g n In , where, applying
                             n1
Stirling’s approximation, n! ∼ nn e−n ,
                          
                     (−g)n ∞ dx − 1 x2 4n      (4n − 1)!! n1  gn n
            g n In =           √ e 2 x = (−g)n             ∼ −        .
                       n!   −∞  2π                 n!            e
This estimate should alarm us: strictly speaking, it states that a series expansion in the
“small parameter” g does not exist. No matter how small g, at roughly the (1/g)th order
in the perturbative expansion the series begins to diverge. In fact, it is easy to predict
this breakdown on qualitative grounds: for g > 0 (g < 0), the integral (5.1) is convergent
(divergent). This implies that the series expansion of the function I(g) around g = 0 must
have zero radius of convergence.
  However, there is also a more “physical” way of understanding the phenomenon. Consider
a one-dimensional version of Eq. (3.16), where the ‘Gaussian average’ is given by Eq. (3.15):
                     ∞                           
                          dx
                         √ e− 2 x x4n =
                                 1 2
                                                           1 = (4n − 1)!!.
                     −∞    2π                 all possible
                                            pairings of 4n objects


The factor (4n − 1)!! measures the combinatorial freedom to pair up 4n objects. This sug-
gests an interpretation of the breakdown of the perturbative expansion as the result of a
competition between the smallness of the expansion parameter g and the combinatorial
proliferation of equivalent contributions, or “pairings,” to the Gaussian integral. Physically,
the combinatorial factor can be interpreted as the number of diﬀerent “partial amplitudes”
contributing to the net result at any given order of perturbation theory. Eventually, the
                         5.1 General structures and low-order expansions                            195

exponential growth of this ﬁgure overpowers the smallness of the expansion parameter,
which is when perturbation theory breaks down. (Oddly the existence of this rather gen-
eral mechanism is usually not mentioned in textbook treatments of quantum perturbation
theory!)
  Does the ill-convergence of the series imply that perturbative approaches to problems
of the structure of Eq. (5.1) are doomed to fail? Fortunately, this is not the case. While
                   ∞ n                                              nmax n
the inﬁnite series    n=0 g In is divergent, a partial resummation     n=0 g In can yield
excellent approximations to the exact result I(g). To see this, let us use the fact that
         nmax (−gx4 )n         4 nmax +1
|e−gx − n=0
     4

                   n!   | ≤ (gx  )
                             (nmax +1)! to estimate the error

                         n
                          max                                               gn         nmax
                                                                 nmax 1          max
                I(g) −          g n In ≤ g nmax +1 |Inmax +1 |     ∼                            .
                         n=0
                                                                              e

Variation with respect to nmax shows that the error reaches its minimum when nmax ∼ g −1
where it scales like e−1/g . (Notice the exponential dependence of the error on the coupling
g – e.g. for a small coupling g ≈ 0.01, the 100th order of the perturbation theory would
lead to an approximation of astronomic absolute precision e−100 .) By contrast, for g ≈ 0.3,
perturbation theory becomes poor after the third order!
   Summarizing, the moral to be taken from the analysis of the integral (5.1) (and its
generalizations to theories of a more complex structure) is that perturbative expansions
should not be confused with rigorous Taylor expansions. Rather they represent asymptotic
expansions, in the sense that, for weaker and weaker coupling, a partial resummation of
the perturbation series leads to an ever more precise approximation to the exact result. For
weak enough coupling the distinction between Taylor expansion and asymptotic expansion
becomes academic (at least for physicists). However, for intermediate or strong coupling
theories, the asymptotic character of perturbation theory must be kept in mind.



                                              φ4 -theory
While the ordinary integral discussed in the previous section conveyed something of the
general status of perturbation theory, we need to proceed to the level of functional integrals
to learn more about the practical implementation of perturbative methods. The simplest
interacting ﬁeld theory displaying all relevant structures is deﬁned through the ﬁeld integral
                                                                         
                             −S[φ]                     1         r 2
                Z ≡ Dφ e           , S[φ] ≡ d x   d           2
                                                         (∂φ) + φ + gφ ,  4
                                                                                         (5.2)
                                                       2         2

where φ is a scalar bosonic ﬁeld. Owing to the structure of the interaction, this model is
often referred to as the φ4 -theory. The φ4 -model not only provides a prototypical envi-
ronment in which features of interacting ﬁeld theories can be explored, but also appears
in numerous applications. For example, close to its critical point, the d-dimensional Ising
model is described by the φ4 -action (see Info below). More generally, it can be shown that
the long-range behavior of classical statistical systems with a single order parameter (e.g.
196                                             Perturbation theory

the density of a ﬂuid, uniaxial magnetization, etc.) is described by the φ4 -action.1 Within
the context of statistical mechanics, S[φ] is known as the Ginzburg–Landau free energy
functional (and less frequently also as the Landau–Wilson model).
    INFO The d-dimensional Ising model describes the classical magnetism of a lattice of magnetic
    moments Si ∈ {1, −1} that can take only two values ±1. It is deﬁned through the Hamiltonian
                                                           
                                  HIsing =    Si Cij Sj − H    Si ,                        (5.3)
                                                        ij                i

    where Cij = C(|i − j|) is a (translationally invariant) correlation matrix describing the mutual
    interaction of the spins, H is an external magnetic ﬁeld, and the sums run over the sites of a d-
    dimensional lattice (assumed hypercubic for simplicity). The Ising model represents the simplest
    Hamiltonian describing classical magnetism. In low dimensions d = 1, 2, it can be solved exactly,
    i.e. the partition function and all observables depending on it can be computed rigorously (see
    our discussion in Chapter 8). However, for higher dimensions, no closed solutions exist and one
    has to resort to approximation strategies to analyze the properties of the partition function.
    Below we will show that the long-range physics of the system is described by φ4 -theory. Notice
    that (save for the exceptional case d = 1 discussed in Section 8.1) the system is expected to
    display a magnetic phase transition. As a corollary this implies that the φ4 -model must exhibit
    much more interesting behavior than its innocent appearance suggests!
       Consider the classical partition function
                                              S K S + h S
                                       Z=       e ij i ij j   i i i,                            (5.4)
                                                  {Si }

    where K ≡ −βC, and hi ≡ βHi , and we have generalized Eq. (??) to the case of a spatially
    varying magnetic ﬁeld, Hi . The feature that prevents us from rigorously computing the conﬁgu-
    rational sum is, of course, the interaction between the spins. However,        at a price, the interaction
                                                                           1           −1
    can be removed: let us consider the “fat unity,” 1 = N Dψ e−           4   ij ψi (K    )ij ψj
                                                                                                   , where Dψ ≡
                −1
       i dψi , K    is the inverse of the correlation matrix, and N = 1/ det(4πK) is a factor normal-
                                                                                         
    izing the integral to unity. A shift of the integration variables, ψi → ψi − 2 j Kij Sj , brings the
    integral into the form
                                    
                                              1       −1                
                             1=N       Dψ e− 4 ij ψi (K )ij ψj + i Si ψi − ij Si Kij Sj .

    Incorporating the fat unity under the spin sum in the partition function, one obtains
                                        − 1  ψ (K −1 ) ψ + S (ψ +h )
                          Z=N       Dψ       e 4 ij i      ij j    i i  i  i
                                                                             .                                   (5.5)
                                                {Si }

    Thus, we have removed the interaction between the spin variables at the expense of introducing a
                                                                                     
    new continuous ﬁeld {ψi }. Why should one do this? A multi-dimensional integral Dψ is usually
                                                       
    easier to work with than a multi-dimensional sum     {Si } over discrete objects. Moreover, the
    new representation may provide a more convenient platform for approximation strategies. The

1
    Heuristically, this is explained by the fact that S[φ] is the simplest interacting (i.e. non-Gaussian) model action
    invariant under inversion φ ←→ −φ. (The action of a uniaxial magnet should depend on the value of the
    local magnetization, but not on its sign.) A purely Gaussian theory might describe wave-like ﬂuctuations of
    the magnetization, but not the “critical” phenomenon of a magnetic transition. One thus needs, at least, a
    φ4 -interaction term. Later on we will see that more complex monomials of φ, such as φ6 or (∂φ)4 , are inessential
    in the long-range limit.
                              5.1 General structures and low-order expansions                                             197

    transformation leading from Eq. (5.4) to (5.5) is our ﬁrst example of a Hubbard–Stratonovich
    transformation. The interaction of one ﬁeld is decoupled at the expense of the introduction of
    another. Notice that, in spite of the somewhat high-minded designation, the transformation is
    tantamount to a simple shift of a Gaussian integration variable, a feature shared by all Hubbard–
    Stratonovich transformations!
                                 
       The summation {Si } = i Si can now be trivially performed:
                                                            -
                                           1         −1
                      Z = N          Dψ e− 4 ij ψi (K )ij ψj     (2 cosh(ψi + hi ))
                                                                                    i
                                                                                               
                                                                                −1
                                                        −1       ij (ψi −hi )(K    )ij (ψj −hj )+
                              =       N        Dψ e      4                                           i ln(cosh ψi )   ,
                                                      
    where we have absorbed the inessential factor i 2 into a redeﬁnition of the normalization
                                                                        
    N . Finally, changing integration variables from ψi to φi ≡ 12 j [K −1 ]ij ψj , one arrives at the
    intermediate result
                                                                        
                        Z=N       Dφ e− ij φi Kij φj + i φi hi + i ln cosh(2 j Kij φj ) .

    This representation of the problem still does not look very inviting. To bring it into a form
    amenable to further analytical evaluation, we need to make the simplifying assumption that we
    are working at low temperatures such that the exponential weight Kij = βC(|i − j|) inhibits
    strong ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld φ. More precisely, we assume that |φi |       1 and that the spatial
    proﬁle of the ﬁeld is smooth. To make use of these conditions, we switch to a Fourier repre-
                                                        −ik·(ri −rj )
    sentation, φi = √1N k e−ik·ri φ(k), Kij = N1          ke            K(k), and expand ln cosh(x) =
      x − 12 x + · · · . Noting that (Kφ)(k) = K(k)φ(k) = K(0)φ(k) + 12 k2 K  (0)φ(k) + O(k4 ), we
    1 2
    2
            1 4

    conclude that the low-temperature expansion of the action has the general structure
                              
                  S[φ] =          [φk (c1 + c2 k · k)φ−k + c3 φk h−k ]
                                  k
                                      c4       
                                  +                     φk1 φk2 φk3 φk4 δk1 +k2 +k3 +k4 ,0 + O(k4 , h2 , φ6 ).
                                      N
                                           k1 ,...,k4

       EXERCISE Show that the coeﬃcients ci are given by c1 = K(0)(1 − 2K(0)), c2 = 12 K  (0)(1 −
                                           4
       4K(0)), c3 = 1, c4 = 4K(0)
                              3
                                  .

    Switching back to a real space representation and taking a continuum limit, S[φ] assumes the
    form of a prototypical φ4 -action
                                     
                                                                        !
                            S[φ] = dd x c2 (∂φ)2 + c1 φ2 + c3 φh + c4 φ4 .

    A rescaling of variables φ → √2c 1
                                       2
                                         φ ﬁnally brings the action into the form Eq. (5.2) with coeﬃ-
    cients r = c1 /c2 and g = c4 /(2c2 ).2
       We have thus succeeded in describing the low-temperature phase of the Ising model in terms
    of a φ4 -model. While the structure of the action could have been guessed on symmetry grounds,
    the “microscopic” derivation has the advantage that it yields explicit expressions for the coupling
    constants. There is actually one interesting aspect of the dependence of these constants on the

2
    The only diﬀerence is that the magnetic φ4 -action contains a term linear in φ and h. The reason is that, in the
    presence of a ﬁnite magnetic ﬁeld, the action is no longer invariant under inversion φ → −φ.
198                                          Perturbation theory

    parameters of the microscopic model. Consider the constant c1 controlling the k-independent
    contribution to the Gaussian action: c1 ∝ K(0)(1 − 2K(0)) ∝ (1 − 2βC(0)). Since C(0) must be
    positive to ensure the overall stability of the model (exercise: why?) the constant c1 will change
    sign at a certain “critical temperature” β ∗ . For temperatures lower than β ∗ , the Gaussian action
    is unstable (i.e. ﬂuctuations with low wavevector become unbound) and the anharmonic term
    φ4 alone controls the stability of the model. Clearly, the behavior of the system will change
    drastically at this point. Indeed, the critical temperature c1 (β ∗ ) = 0 marks the position of the
    magnetic phase transition, a point to be discussed in more detail below.

Let us begin our primer of perturbation theory by introducing some nomenclature.3 For
simplicity, let us ﬁrst deﬁne the notation
                                                     Dφ e−S[φ] ( · · · )
                                         ··· ≡                           ,                              (5.6)
                                                      Dφ e−S[φ]
for the functional integral, weighted by the action S, of any expression ( · · · ). Due to the
structural similarity to thermal averages of statistical mechanics, · · · is sometimes called
a functional average or functional expectation value. Similarly, let us deﬁne
                                                     Dφ e−S0 [φ] ( · · · )
                                        ··· 0 ≡                            ,                            (5.7)
                                                      Dφ e−S0 [φ]
for the functional average over the Gaussian action S0 ≡ S|g=0 . The average over a product
of ﬁeld variables,
                          Cn (x1 , x2 , . . . , xn ) ≡ φ(x1 )φ(x2 ) · · · φ(xn ) ,                      (5.8)
is known as an n-point correlation function or, for brevity, just the n-point function.4
                                                            The one-point function C1 (x) =
   George Green 1793–1841                                 φ(x) simply measures the expec-
   His only schooling consisted of four terms in
   1801/1802. He owned and worked a Nottingham
                                                         tation value of the ﬁeld amplitude.
   windmill. Green made major contributions to poten-    For the particular case of the φ4 -
   tial theory although where he learnt his mathemat-    problem above the phase transition
   ical skills is a mystery. The inventor of Green func- and, more generally, the majority of
   tions, he used the method of sources and sinks in
   potential ﬂows. He published only ten mathemati-      ﬁeld theories with an action even in
   cal works, the ﬁrst and most important being pub-     the ﬁeld amplitudes, C1 = 0 and the
   lished at his own expense in 1828, “An essay on the   ﬁrst non-vanishing correlation func-
   application of mathematical analysis to the theories
   of electricity and magnetism.” He left his mill and   tion is the two-point function
    became an undergraduate at Cambridge in 1833 at
    the age of 40, then a Fellow of Gonville and Caius                   G(x1 − x2 ) ≡ C2 (x1 , x2 ).   (5.9)
    College in 1839.
                                                     (Why does C2 depend only on the
diﬀerence of its arguments?) The two-point function is sometimes also called the propa-
gator of the theory, the Green function or, especially in the more formal literature, the
resolvent operator.

3
    Needless to say, the jargon introduced below is not restricted to the φ4 example!
4
    Notice that, depending on the context and/or scientiﬁc community, the phrase “n-point function” sometimes
    refers to C2n instead of Cn .
                              5.1 General structures and low-order expansions                                199

  The existence of diﬀerent names suggests that we have met with an important object.
Indeed, we will shortly see that the Green function not only represents a central building
block of the theory but also carries profound physical signiﬁcance.


    INFO To develop some understanding of the physical meaning of the correlation function,
    let us recall that the average of a linear ﬁeld amplitude, φ(0), vanishes. (See the ﬁgure, where
    a diagram of a few “typical” ﬁeld conﬁgurations is sketched as functions of a coordinate.)
       However, the average of the squared φ
    amplitude (φ(0))2 is certainly non-vanishing
    simply because we are integrating over
    a positive object. Now, what happens if
    we split our single observation point into
    two, φ2 (0)0 → φ(0)φ(x)0 = G(x)? For
    asymptotically large values of x, it is likely
    that the two amplitudes ﬂuctuate indepen-                        0      x
                                        |x|→∞
    dently of each other, i.e. G(x) −→ 0. However, this decoupling will not happen locally. The
    reason is that the ﬁeld amplitudes are correlated over a certain range in space. For example,
    if φ(0) > 0, the ﬁeld amplitude will, on average, stay positive in an entire neighborhood of 0
    since rapid ﬂuctuations of the ﬁeld are energetically costly (i.e. due to the gradient term in the
    action!). The spatial correlation proﬁle of the ﬁeld is described by the function G(x).
       How does the correlation behavior of the ﬁeld relate to the basic parameters of the action?
    A quick answer can be given by dimensional analysis. The action of the theory must be
    dimensionless (because it appears as the argument of an exponential). Denoting the dimension of
                                                      d 
    any quantity X by [X], and using the fact that      d x = Ld , [∂] = L−1 , inspection of Eq. (5.2)
    obtains the set of relations
                                 Ld−2 [φ]2 = 1,    Ld [r][φ]2 = 1,    Ld [g][φ]4 = 1,
    from which it follows that [φ] = L−(d−2)/2 , [r] = L−2 , [g] = Ld−4 . In general, both system
    parameters, g and r, carry a non-zero length-dimension. However, temporarily concentrating on
    the non-interacting sector, g = 0, the only parameter of the theory, r, has dimensionality L−2 .
    Arguing in reverse, we conclude that any intrinsic length scale produced by the theory (e.g. the
    range over which the ﬁelds are correlated), must scale as ∼ r−1/2 .

         A more quantitative description can be obtained by considering the free propagator of
    the theory,
                                             G0 (x) ≡ φ(0)φ(x)0 .                                        (5.10)
    Since the momentum representation of the Gaussian action is simply given by S0 [φ] =
       
     1
          φp (p2 + r)φ−p , it is convenient to ﬁrst compute G0 in reciprocal space: G0,p ≡
    2 d p ip·x          
       d xe     G0 (x) =   p φp φp 0 . Using the Gaussian contraction rule Eq. (3.14), the free
                                    

    functional average takes the form φp φp 0 = δp+p ,0 (p2 + r)−1 , i.e.5
                                                                    1
                                          G0,p = φp φ−p 0 =           .                                  (5.11)
                                                                 p2 + r

5
    The result G0,p = (p2 + r)−1 clariﬁes why G is referred to as a “Green function.” Indeed, G0,p is (the Fourier
    representation of the) Green function of the diﬀerential equation (−∂r2 + r)G(r, r ) = δ(r − r ).
200                                      Perturbation theory

  To obtain G(x), we need to compute the inverse transform
                                                     
                                 1  −ip·x               dd p e−ip·x
                        G0 (x) = d     e     G0,p ≈                  ,                          (5.12)
                                L p                     (2π)d p2 + r

  where we have assumed that the system is large, i.e. the sum over momenta can be exchanged
  for an integral.
     For simplicity, let us compute the integral for a one-dimensional system. (For the two- and
  three-dimensional cases see exercise below.) Setting p2 + r = (p + ir1/2 )(p − ir1/2 ), we note that
  the (complex extension of the) p integral has simple poles at ±ir1/2 . For x smaller (larger) than
  zero, the integrand is analytic in the upper (lower) complex p-plane and closure of the integration
  contour to a semicircle of inﬁnite radius gives
                                                                        1/2
                                        dp         e−ipx              e−r |x|
                           G0 (x) =                                 =         .                 (5.13)
                                        2π (p + ir1/2 )(p − ir1/2 )    2r1/2
  This result conveys an interesting observation: typically, correlations decay exponentially, at
  a rate set by the correlation length ξ ≡ r−1/2 . However, as r approaches 0, the system
  becomes long-range correlated. The origin of this phenomenon can be understood by inspecting
  the structure of the Gaussian contribution to the action (5.2). For r → 0 (and still neglecting the
  φ4 contribution) nothing prevents the constant ﬁeld mode φ(x) = φ0 = const. from becoming
  inﬁnitely large, i.e. the ﬂuctuating contribution to the ﬁeld becomes relatively less important
  than the constant oﬀset. The increasing “stiﬀness” of the ﬁeld in turn manifests itself in a growth
  of spatial correlations (cf. the ﬁgure on page 201). Notice that this dovetails with our previous
  statement that r = 0 marks the position of a phase transition. Indeed, the build-up of inﬁnitely
  long-range spatial correlations is known to be a hallmark of second-order phase transitions (see
  Chapter 8).

  EXERCISE Referring to Eq. (5.12), show that, in dimensions d = 2 and d = 3,
                                                         *          √                         √
               d=2        d2 k e−ik·x    1     √              − 2π
                                                                 1
                                                                   ln r|x| ,           |x|   1/ r,
      G0 (x)   =                      =    K0 ( r|x|) =             √ 2 − 1 −√r|x|             √
                              2 2
                         (2π) k + r     2π                    1
                                                              2
                                                                (2π  r|x|)   2e    ,   |x|  1/ r,
                                          √
               d=3        d3 k e−ik·x   e− r|x|
      G0 (x)   =              3 2
                                      =         .
                         (2π) k + r      4π|x|
  Notice that, in both cases, the Green function diverges in the limit |x| → 0 and decays exponen-
  tially (at a rate ∼ r−1/2 ) for |x|  r−1/2 .



                             Perturbation theory at low orders
Having discussed the general structure of the theory and of its free propagator, let us turn
our attention to the role of the interaction contribution to the action,
                                                 
                                     Sint [φ] ≡ g dd x φ4 .

Within the jargon of ﬁeld theory, an integrated monomial of a ﬁeld variable (like φ4 ) is
commonly called an (interaction) operator or a vertex (operator). Keeping in mind the
words of caution given in Section 5.1, we wish to explore perturbatively how the interaction
                        5.1 General structures and low-order expansions                       201

vertex aﬀects the functional expectation value of any given ﬁeld observable, i.e. we wish to
analyze expansions of the type
                              ...
                                     (−g)n
                                       n!    X[φ]( dd x φ4 )n 0   nmax
                              n=0
                     X[φ] ≈         (−g)n
                                   ...                          ≈       X (n) ,       (5.14)
                                                  d    4
                                              ( d xφ ) 0 n
                                          n!                       n=0
                                  n=0

where X may be any observable and X (n) denotes the contribution of nth order to the
expansion in g. The limits on the summation in the numerator and denominator are symbolic
because, as explained above, we will need to terminate the total perturbative expansion at
a certain ﬁnite order nmax .
  EXERCISE To navigate the following section, it is helpful to recapitulate Section 3.2 on contin-
  uum Gaussian integration.

To keep the discussion concrete, let us focus on the perturbative expansion of the propa-
gator in the coupling constant, g. (A physical application relating to this expansion will be
discussed below.) The zeroth-order contribution G(0) = G0 has been discussed before, so
the ﬁrst non-trivial term we have to explore is G(1) :
                   @                       A    @            A @              A 
                                                           
 G (x, x ) = −g
   (1)
                       φ(x) d y φ(y) φ(x ) − φ(x)φ(x )
                               d      4                                 d
                                                                      d y φ(y) 4
                                                                                     . (5.15)
                                                 0                 0                 0

Since the functional average is now over a Gaussian action, this expression can be evaluated
by Wick’s theorem, Eq. (3.21). For example, the functional average of the ﬁrst of the two
terms leads to (integral signs and constants stripped oﬀ for clarity)
                   9                 :
                     φ(x)φ(y)4 φ(x ) 0 = 3 φ(x)φ(x ) 0 [ φ(y)φ(y) 0 ]
                                                                        2


                        +12 φ(x)φ(y) 0 φ(y)φ(y) 0 φ(y)φ(x ) 0
                        = 3G0 (x − x )G0 (0)2 + 12G0 (x − y)G0 (0)G0 (y − x ),           (5.16)
where we have used the fact that the operator inverse of the Gaussian action is, by deﬁnition,
the free Green function (cf. Eq. (5.10)). Further, notice that the total number of terms
appearing on the right-hand side is equal to 15 = (6−1)!! which is just the number of distinct
pairings of six objects (cf. Eq. (3.21) and with our discussion of Section 5.1). Similarly, the
second contribution to G(1) leads to
           φ(x)φ(x ) 0 φ(y)4 0 = 3 φ(x)φ(x ) 0 [ φ(y)2 0 ]2 = 3G0 (x − x )G0 (0)2 .
  Before analyzing these structures in more detail, let us make some general observations.
The ﬁrst-order expansion of G contains a number of factors of G0 (0), the free Green function
evaluated at coinciding points. This bears disturbing consequences. To see this, consider
G0 (0) evaluated in momentum space:
                                          
                                             dd p     1
                                G0 (0) =                  .                            (5.17)
                                            (2π)d p2 + r
For dimensions d > 1, the integral is divergent at large momenta or short wavelengths; we
have met with an ultraviolet (UV) divergence. Physically, the divergence implies that,
202                                     Perturbation theory

already at ﬁrst order, our expansion runs into a diﬃculty that is obviously related to the
short-distance structure of the system. How can this problem be overcome? One way out
is to remember that ﬁeld theories like the φ4 -model represent eﬀective low-temperature, or
long-wavelength, approximations to more microscopic models. The range of applicability of
the action must be limited to wavelengths in excess of some microscopic lattice cutoﬀ a (e.g.
the lattice spacing), or momenta k < a−1 . It seems that, once that cutoﬀ has been built
in, the convergence problem is solved. However, there is something unsatisfactory in this
argument. All our perturbative corrections, and therefore the ﬁnal result of the analysis,
exhibit sensitivity to the microscopic cutoﬀ parameter. But this is not what we expect of a
sensible low-energy theory (cf. the discussion of Chapter 1)! The UV problem signals that
something more interesting is going on than a naive cutoﬀ regularization has the capacity
to describe. We discuss this point extensively in Chapter 8.
   However, even if we temporarily close our eyes to the UV-phenomenon, there is another
problem. For dimensions d ≤ 2, and in the limit r → 0, G0 (0) also diverges at small
momenta, an infrared (IR) divergence. Being related to structures at large wavelengths,
this type of singularity should attract our attention even more than the UV-divergence men-
tioned above. Indeed, it is intimately related to the accumulation of long-range correlations
in the limit r → 0 (cf. the structure of the integral (5.12)). We come back to the discussion
of the IR singularities, and their connection to the UV phenomenon, in Chapter 8.
   The considerations above show that the perturbative analysis of functional integrals will
be accompanied by all sorts of divergences. Moreover, there is another, less fundamental, but
also important, point: referring to Eq. (5.16), we have to concede that the expression does
not look particularly inviting. To emphasize the point, let us consider the core contribution
to the expansion at second order in g.

  EXERCISE Show that the 10th-order contraction leads to the 945=(10-1)!! terms
       .                        /
        φ(x)φ(y)4 φ(y )4 φ(x ) 0 = 9G0 (x − x )G0 (0)4 + 72G0 (x − x )G0 (y − y )2 G0 (0)2
                                      
       +24G0 (x − x )G0 (y − y )4 + 36G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y)G0 (0)3
        +144(G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y)G0 (y − y )2 G0 (0) + G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y )G0 (0)2 G0 (y − y ))
                                                          
        +96G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y )G0 (y − y)3 + (y ↔ y ) .                                   (5.18)

  Note: Our further discussion will not rely on this result. It only serves an illustrative purpose.

Clearly Eq. (5.18) is highly opaque. There are eight groups of diﬀerent terms, but it is
not obvious how to attribute any meaning to these contributions. Further, should we con-
sider the full second-order Green function G(2) , i.e. take account of the expansion of both
numerator and denominator in Eq. (5.14), we would ﬁnd that some contributions cancel
(see Problem 5.5). Clearly, the situation will not improve at third and higher orders in g.
                               5.1 General structures and low-order expansions                                    203


                                                       3              y +12
                           x      y     x′                 x   x                  x   y    x′


Figure 5.1 Graphical representation of a ﬁrst-order-in-g contraction contributing to the expansion
of the Green function.


   To eﬃciently apply perturbative concepts beyond lowest orders, φ (x)                             φ (y)
                                                                                   x              y
a more eﬃcient formulation of the expansion is needed. The key
to the construction of a better language lies in the observation                            〈 〉0
that our previous notation is full of redundancy, i.e. in the full
contraction of a perturbative contribution, we represent our ﬁelds
                                                                                     x           y
by φ(x). A more compact way of keeping track of the presence                           G0 (x, y)
of that ﬁeld is shown in the upper portion of the ﬁgure to the
right. Draw a point (with an optional “x” labeling its position) and attach a little leg to
it. The leg indicates that the ﬁelds are sociable objects, i.e. they need to ﬁnd a partner
with which to pair. After the contraction, a pair φ(x)φ(y) → G0 (x − y) becomes a free
Green function. Graphically, this information can be represented by a pairwise connection
of the legs of the ﬁeld symbols to lines, where each line is identiﬁed with a Green function
connecting the two terminating points. The full contraction of a free correlation function
 φ(x1 )φ(x2 ) · · · φ(x2n ) 0 is represented by the set of all distinct diagrams formed by pairwise
connection of the ﬁeld vertices.
   Figure 5.1 shows the graphical representation of the contraction of Eq. (5.16). (The cross
appearing on the left-hand side represents four ﬁeld operators sitting at the same point y.)
According to our rule formulated above, each of the two diagrams on the right-hand side
represents the product of three Green functions, taken between the speciﬁed coordinates.
Further, each contribution is weighted by a combinatorial factor, i.e. the number of identical
diagrams of that structure. Consider, for example, the second contribution on the right-
hand side. It is formed by connecting the “external” ﬁeld vertex at x to any of the legs
of the internal vertex at y: four possibilities. Next, the vertex at x is connected with one
of the remaining three unsaturated vertices at y: three possibilities. The last contraction
y ↔ y is ﬁxed, i.e. we obtain altogether 3 × 4 = 12 equivalent diagrams – “equivalent” in
that each of these represents the same conﬁguration of Green functions.

    EXERCISE Verify that the graphical representation of the second-order contraction Eq. (5.18)
    is as shown in Fig. 5.2.6 Associate the diagrams with individual contributions appearing in
    Eq. (5.18) and try to reproduce the combinatorial factors. (For more details, see Problem 5.5.)

The graphical representation of the contractions shown in Fig. 5.1 and 5.2 provides us with
suﬃcient background to list some general aspects of the diagrammatic approach:

6
    In the ﬁgure, the coordinates carried by the ﬁeld vertices have been dropped for notational simplicity. To restore
    the full information carried by any of these “naked” graphs one attaches coordinates x and x to the external
    ﬁeld vertices and integration coordinates yi to each of the i nodes that do not connect to an external ﬁeld vertex.
    Since no information is lost, diagrams are often represented without explicit reference to coordinates.
204                                   Perturbation theory


                                         9                   + 72




                    + 24                + 72                + 288




                   + 192               + 288


Figure 5.2 Graphical representation of the second-order correction to the Green function. In the
main text, the seven types of diagram contributing to the contraction will be referred to (in the
order they appear above) as diagrams 1 to 7.


  Firstly, diagrammatic methods help to eﬃciently represent the perturbative expansion.
  However, we are still left with the problem (see the discussion above) of computing the
  analytical expressions corresponding to individual diagrams. To go back from an nth-order
  graph to its analytical representation one (i) attaches coordinates to all ﬁeld vertices,
  (ii) identiﬁes lines between points with Green functions, (iii) multiplies the graph by the
  overall constant g n /n!, and (iv) integrates over all of the internal coordinates. When one
  encounters expressions like G(n) = “sum of graphs,” the operations (i)–(iv) are implicit.
  As should be clear from the formulation of our basic rules, there is no ﬁxed rule as to
  how to represent a diagram. As long as no lines are cut, any kind of reshaping, twisting,
  rotating, etc. of the diagram leaves its content invariant. (At large orders of perturbation
  theory, it often takes a second look to identify two diagrams as equivalent.)
  From the assembly of diagrams contributing to any given order, a number of internal
  structures common to the series expansion become apparent. For example, looking at the
  diagrams shown in Fig. 5.2, we notice that some are connected, and some are not. Among
  the set of connected diagrams (nos. 5, 6, 7) there are some whose “core portion,” i.e.
  the content of the diagram after the legs connecting to the external vertices have been
  removed, can be cut into two pieces just by cutting one more line (no. 7). Diagrams of
  this type are called one-particle reducible while the others are termed one-particle
  irreducible. More generally, a diagram whose core region can be cut by severing n lines is
  called n-particle reducible. (For example, no. 6 is three-particle reducible, no. 7 one-
  particle reducible, etc.) One can also attach a loop order to a diagram, i.e. the number of
  inequivalent loops formed by segments of Green functions (for Fig. 5.2: 4, 3, 3, 3, 2, 2, 2,
  in that order). One (correctly) expects that these structures, which are diﬃcult to discern
  from the equivalent analytical representation, will reﬂect themselves in the mathematics
  of the perturbative expansion. We return to the discussion of this point below.
  Then there is the issue of combinatorics. The diagrammatic representation simpliﬁes
  the determination of the combinatorial factors appearing in the expansion. However, the
  problem of getting the combinatorics right remains non-trivial. (If you are not impressed
  with the factors entering the second-order expansion, consider the (14 − 1)!! = 135135
                            5.1 General structures and low-order expansions                           205

    terms contributing at third order!) In some sub-disciplines of theoretical physics, the art
    of identifying the full set of combinatorial coeﬃcients at large orders of perturbation
    theory has been developed to a high degree of sophistication. Indeed, one can set up
    reﬁned sets of diagrammatic construction rules which to a considerable extent automate
    the combinatorics. Pedagogical discussions of these rules can be found, for example, in
    the textbooks by Negele and Orland, and Ryder.7 However, as we will see shortly, the
    need to explicitly carry out a large-order expansion, with account of all diagrammatic
    sub-processes, rarely arises in modern condensed matter physics; mostly one is interested
    in subclasses of diagrams, for which the combinatorics is less problematic. For this reason,
    the present text does not contain a state-of-the-art exposition of all diagrammatic tools
    and interested readers are referred to the literature.
    Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the diagrammatic representation of a given con-
    tribution to the perturbative expansion often suggests a physical interpretation of the
    corresponding physical process. (After all, any term contributing to the expansion of a
    physical observable must correspond to some “real” physical process.) Unfortunately, the
    φ4 -theory is not well suited to illustrate this aspect, i.e., being void of any dynamical con-
    tent, it is a little bit too simple. However, the possibility of “reading” individual diagrams
    will become evident in the next section when we discuss an application to the interacting
    electron gas.

Above we have introduced the diagrammatic approach on the example of ﬁeld expectation
values φ(x)(φ(y)4 )n φ(x ) 0 . However, to obtain the Green function to any given order in
perturbation theory, we need to add to these expressions the contributions emanating from
the expansion of the denominator of the functional average (cf. Eq. (5.14) and (5.15)).
While, at ﬁrst sight, the need to keep track of even more terms seems to complicate matters,
we will see that, in fact, quite the opposite is true! The combined expansion of numerator
and denominator leads to a miraculous “cancellation mechanism” that greatly simpliﬁes the
analysis.
                                        –
                                    0            0      0



                                        =3           + 12              –3



                                        = 12

Figure 5.3 Graphical representation of the ﬁrst-order correction to the Green function: vacuum
graphs cancel out.
  Let us exemplify the mechanism of cancellation on G(1) . The three diagrams correspond-
ing to the contractions of Eq. (5.15) are shown in Fig. 5.3, where integral signs and coordi-
nates are dropped for simplicity. On the left-hand side of the equation, the brackets · · · 0

7
    J. W. Negele and H. Orland, Quantum Many Particle Systems (Addison-Wesley, 1988); L. H. Ryder, Quantum
    Field Theory (Cambridge University Press, 1996).
206                                              Perturbation theory

indicate that the second contribution comes from the expansion of the denominator. The
point to be noticed is that the graph produced by the contraction of that term cancels
against a contribution arising from the numerator. One further observes that the canceled
graph is of a special type: it contains an interaction vertex that does not connect to any of
the external vertices. Diagrams with that property are commonly termed vacuum graphs.8

    EXERCISE Construct the diagrammatic representation of G(2) and verify that the expansion of
    the denominator eliminates all vacuum graphs of the numerator. In particular, show that G(2) is
    given by the sum of connected diagrams shown in Fig. 5.4. (For more details, see Problem 5.5.)


                          G(2) = 192                    + 288                + 288


     Figure 5.4 Graphical representation of the second-order contribution to the Green function.
Indeed, the cancellation of vacuum graphs pertains to higher-order correlation functions
and to all orders of the expansion:


          The contribution to a correlation function C (2n) (x1 , . . . , x2n ) at lth order of
          perturbation theory is given by the sum of all graphs, excluding vacuum graphs.

For example, the ﬁrst-order expansion of the four-point                            1    2
           (4)                                                 C (4)(1,2,3,4) = 24
function C (x1 , . . . x4 ) is shown in the ﬁgure, where coor-
                                                                                   3    4
dinates xi ↔ i are abbreviated by indices and “+ perm.”
stands for the six permutations obtained by interchang-
ing arguments. In the literature, the statement of vacuum                       1    2
                                                                     +    12           + perm.
graph cancellation is sometimes referred to as the linked                       3    4
cluster theorem. Notice that the linked cluster feature
takes care of two problems: ﬁrstly we are relieved of the burden of a double expansion of
numerator and denominator, and secondly only non-vacuum contributions to the expansion
of the former need to be kept.

    INFO The proof of the linked cluster theorem is straightforward. Consider           a contribution
                                                                            n .        d 4 n/
    of nth order to the expansion of the numerator of Eq. (5.14): (−g)   n!
                                                                                X[φ](  d xφ )   0
                                                                                                  . The
    contraction of this expression will lead to a sum of vacuum graphs of pth-order and non-vacuum
    graphs of (n − p)th-order, where p runs from 0 to n. The pth-order contribution is given by
                                  0          n−p 1n.v. 2 p 3
                              1 n
                                         X[φ]     φ4               φ4       ,
                             n! p                                         0
                                                                     0

    where the superscript · · · n.v. indicates that the contraction excludes vacuum graphs and the
    combinatorial coeﬃcient counts the number of possibilities to choose p vertices φ4 of a total of n

8
    The term “vacuum graph” has its origin in the diagrammatic methods invented in the 1950s in the context
    of particle theory. Instead of thermal averages · · · 0 , one considered matrix elements Ω| · · · |Ω taken on the
    ground state or “vacuum” of the ﬁeld theory. This caused matrix elements Ω|(Sint [φ])n |Ω not containing an
    external ﬁeld vertex to be dubbed “vacuum graphs.”
                           5.1 General structures and low-order expansions                                                              207

                          p1    –p1 –p2 –p3                                          p1                    p1
                                                                  3                       +12
                          p2        p3                                 p             p2         p      p
                    p                           –p


Figure 5.5 Momentum space representation of a ﬁrst-order contribution to the Green function.
Internal momenta pi are integrated over.


  vertices to form a vacuum graph. Summing over p, we ﬁnd that the expansion of the numerator,
  split into vacuum and non-vacuum contributions, reads
                                        0            n−p 1n.v. 2      p 3
                    ∞  n
                              (−g)n
                                          X[φ]    , φ4                , φ4        .
                    n=0 p=0
                            (n − p)! p!                                         00

  By a straightforward rearrangement of the summations, this can be rewritten as
                    
                    ∞       2                             n 3n.v.       
                                                                           ∞       2                 p 3
                      (−g)n                                                  (−g)p
                                         X[φ]        , φ4                                       , φ4                .
                    n=0
                               n!                                 0        p=0
                                                                                     p!                         0


  The p-summation recovers exactly the expansion of the denominator, so we are left with the sum
  over all non-vacuum contractions.

Before concluding this section, let us discuss one last technical point. The translational
invariance of the φ4 -action suggests a representation of the theory in reciprocal space.
Indeed, the momentum space representation of the propagator Eq. (5.11) is much
simpler than the real space form, and the subsequent analytical evaluation of diagrams will
be formulated in momentum space anyway (cf. the prototypical expression (5.17)).
   The diagrammatic formulation of the theory in momentum φ p                                                                           φ–p
space is straightforward. All we need to do is to slightly adjust             p                                                    –p
the graphical code. Inspection of Eq. (5.11) shows that the ele-
                                                                                                                              〈...〉0
mentary contraction should now be formulated as indicated in the
ﬁgure. Only ﬁelds with opposite momentum can be contracted;
the line carries this momenta as a label. Notice that the momen-                                                          p
tum representation of the ﬁeld vertex φ4 (x) is not given by φ4p .                                                      G0( p)
Rather, Fourier transformation of the vertex leads to the three-
fold convolution
                   
                                    1 
                      dd x φ4 (x) → d         φp1 φp2 φp3 φp4 δp1 +p2 +p3 +p4 .
                                   L p ,...,p
                                                     1        4


The graphical representation of the ﬁrst-order correction to the Green function (i.e. the
momentum space analog of Fig. 5.3) is shown in Fig. 5.5. It is useful to think about the
vertices of the momentum-space diagrammatic language in the spirit of “Kirchhoﬀ laws”:
the sum of all momenta ﬂowing into a vertex is equal to zero. Consequently (exercise) the
total sum of all momenta “ﬂowing” into a diagram from external ﬁeld vertices must also
equal zero: φp1 φp2 · · · φpn 0 → δni=1 pi ,0 (· · · ). This fact expresses the conservation of the
total momentum characteristic for theories with global momentum conservation.
208                                           Perturbation theory

    EXERCISE Represent the diagrams of the second-order contraction shown in Fig. 5.2 in momen-
    tum space. Convince yourself that the “Kirchhoﬀ law” suﬃces to ﬁx the result. Observe that the
    number of summations over internal momenta is equal to the number of loops.

This concludes the ﬁrst part of our introduction to the formal elements of perturbation
theory. Critical readers will object that, while we undertook some eﬀorts to eﬃciently rep-
resent the perturbative expansion, we have not in the least addressed the question of how
interactions will actually modify the results of the free theory. Indeed, we are not yet in
a position to quantitatively address this problem, the reason being that we ﬁrst need to
better understand the origin and remedy of the UV/IR divergences observed above.
   However, temporarily ignoring the presence of this roadblock, let us try to outline what
kind of information can be extracted from perturbative analyses, in principle. One impor-
tant point to be noted is that, in condensed matter physics,9 low-order perturbation theory
is usually not enough to obtain quantitative results. The fact that the “perturbation” cou-
ples to a macroscopic number of degrees of freedom10 usually necessitates summation of
inﬁnite (sub)series of a perturbative expansion or even the application of non-perturbative
methods. This, however, does not mean that the tools developed above are useless: given
a system subject to unfamiliar interactions, low-order perturbation theory will usually be
applied as a ﬁrst step to qualitatively explore the situation. For example, a malign diver-
gence of the expansion in the interaction operator may signal the presence of an instability
towards the formation of a diﬀerent phase. Or it may turn out that certain contributions to
the expansion are “physically more relevant” than others. Technically, such contributions
usually correspond to diagrams of a regular graphical structure. If so, a summation over
all “relevant processes” may be in reach. In either case, low-order expansions provide vital
hints as to the appropriate strategy of further analysis. In the following we discuss two
examples that may help to make these remarks more transparent.


                 5.2 Ground state energy of the interacting electron gas
In Section 2.2 we began to consider the physics of highly mobile electron compounds. We
argued that such a system can be described in terms of the free particle Hamiltonian (2.18)
together with the interaction operator (2.19). While we have reviewed the physics of the
non-interacting system, nothing has hitherto been said about the role of electron–electron
interactions. Yet by now we have developed enough analytical machinery to begin to address
this problem. Below we will apply concepts of perturbation theory to estimate the contribu-
tion of electronic correlations to the ground state energy of a Fermi system. However, before
plunging into the technicalities of this analysis, it is worthwhile discussing some qualitative
aspects of the problem.

9
   There are subdisciplines of physics where the situation is diﬀerent. For example, consider the high-precision
   scattering experiments of atomic and sub-atomic physics. In these areas, the power of a theory to quantitatively
   predict the dependence of scattering rates on the strength of the projectile/target interaction (the “perturba-
   tion”) is a measure of its quality. Such tests involve large-order expansions in the physical coupling parameters.
10
    In contrast, low-order expansions in the external perturbation (e.g. experimentally applied electric or magnetic
    ﬁelds) are usually secure; see Chapter 7.
                           5.2 Ground state energy of the interacting electron gas                              209

                                             Qualitative aspects
A principal question that we will need to address is under what physical conditions are
interactions “weak” (in comparison to the kinetic energy), i.e. when does a perturbative
approach with the interacting electron system make sense at
all? To estimate the relative magnitude of the two contributions
to the energy, let us assume that each electron occupies an aver-
                                                                                                               rs
age volume r03 . According to the uncertainty relation, the min-
imum kinetic energy per particle will be of order O(2 /mr02 ).
On the other hand, assuming that each particle interacts pre-
dominantly with its nearest neighbors, the Coulomb energy is
of order O(e2 /r0 ). The ratio of the two energy scales deﬁnes
the dimensionless density parameter (see ﬁgure)

                             e2 mr02   r0
                                     =    ≡ rs ,
                             r0  2    a0

where a0 = 2 /e2 m denotes the Bohr radius.11 Physically, rs is the radius of the spherical
volume containing one electron on average; for the Coulomb interaction, the denser the
electron gas, the smaller rs . We have thus identiﬁed the electron density as the relevant
parameter controlling the relative strength of electron–electron interactions.
   Below, we will be concerned with
the regime of high density, rs  1,       Eugene P. Wigner 1902–95
or weak Coulomb interaction. In the       Nobel Laureate in Physics in 1963
opposite limit, rs  1, properties        “for his contributions to the the-
                                          ory of the atomic nucleus and the
become increasingly dominated by          elementary particles, particularly
electronic correlations. Ultimately,      through the discovery and appli-
for suﬃciently large rs (low density)     cation of fundamental symmetry
                                          principles.” (Image c The Nobel
it is believed that the electron gas      Foundation.)
undergoes a (ﬁrst order) transition
to a condensed phase known as a Wigner crystal. Although Wigner crystals have never
been unambiguously observed, several experiments performed on low-density electron gases
are consistent with a Wigner crystal ground state. Monte Carlo simulation suggests that
Wigner crystallization may occur for densities with rs > 35 in the two-dimensional electron
gas and rs > 106 in three.12 (Note that this scenario relies on being at low temperature,

11
     Notice that the estimate of the relative magnitude of energy scales mimics Bohr’s famous qualitative discussion
     of the average size of the hydrogen atom.
12
     With the earliest reference to electron crystallization appearing in E. Wigner, On the interaction of electrons
     in metals, Phys. Rev. 46 (1934), 1002–11, a discussion of the results of quantum Monte Carlo simulations in
     three-dimensions can be found in the following papers: D. M. Ceperley and B. J. Alder, Ground state of the
     electron gas by a stochastic method, Phys. Rev. Lett. 45 (1980), 566–569 and N. D. Drummond, Z. Radnai, J.
     R. Train, M. D. Towler, and R. J. Needs, Diﬀusion quantum Monte Carlo study of three-dimensional Wigner
     crystals, Phys. Rev. B 69 (2004), 085116, and in two-dimensions in B. Tanatar and D. M. Ceperley, Ground
     state of the two-dimensional electron gas, Phys. Rev. B 39 (1989) 5005-5016. For a further discussion of the
     subtleties of the transition in two-dimensions, we refer to B. Spivak and S. A. Kivelson, Phases intermediate
     between a two-dimensional electron liquid and Wigner crystal, Phys. Rev. B 70 (2004), 155114.
210                                         Perturbation theory

                      Table 5.1 Density parameters of a number of metals.

                     Metal       rs    Metal      rs     Metal     rs      Metal     rs

                     Li          3.2   Be         1.9    Na        3.9     Al        2.1
                     K           4.9   Sn         2.2    Cu        2.7     Pb        2.3

                     Source: Data taken from Ashcroft and Mermin, Solid State
                     Physics.a
                      a
                          N. W. Ashcroft and N. D. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Holt-
                          Saunders International, 1983).



and on the long-range nature of the Coulomb interaction. In particular, if the Coulomb
interaction is subject to some screening mechanism, V (r) ∼ e−r/λ , rs ∼ (r0 /a0 )e−r0 /λ , and
the inﬂuence of Coulomb interaction at low densities becomes diminished.)
   For rs ∼ O(1), the potential and kinetic energies are comparable. This regime of inter-
mediate coupling is notoriously diﬃcult to describe quantitatively. Yet most metals lie in a
regime of intermediate coupling 2 < rs < 6 (see Table 5.1). Fortunately, there is overwhelm-
ing evidence to suggest that a weak coupling description holds even well outside the regime
over which the microscopic theory can be justiﬁed. The phenomenology of the intermediate
coupling regime is the realm of Landau’s Fermi liquid Theory.13
   The fundamental principle under-
lying the Fermi liquid theory is                   Lev D. Landau 1908–68
one of “adiabatic continuity”:14 in                Nobel Laureate in Physics in 1962
the absence of an electronic phase                 “for his pioneering theories for
                                                   condensed matter, especially liq-
transition (such as Wigner crystal-                uid helium.” Landau’s work covers
lization), a non-interacting ground                all branches of theoretical physics,
state evolves smoothly or adiabat-                 ranging from ﬂuid mechanics to
                                                   quantum ﬁeld theory. A large por-
ically into the interacting ground                 tion of his papers refer to the theory of the con-
state as the strength of interaction               densed state. They started in 1936 with a formu-
is increased.15 An elementary exci-                lation of a general thermodynamical theory of the
                                                   phase transitions of the second order. After P.L.
tation of the non-interacting system               Kapitsa’s discovery, in 1938, of the superﬂuidity
represents an “approximate excita-                 of liquid helium, Landau began extensive research
tion” of the interacting system (i.e.              which led him to the construction of the complete
its “lifetime” is long). Excitations               theory of the “quantum liquids” at very low temper-
                                                   atures. (Image c The Nobel Foundation.)
are quasi-particles (and quasi-holes)
above a sharply deﬁned Fermi surface.

13
   L. D. Landau, The theory of a Fermi liquid, Sov. Phys. JETP 3 (1956), 920.
14
   P. W. Anderson, Basic Notions in Condensed Matter Physics (Benjamin, 1984).
15
                            As a simple non-interacting example, consider the adiabatic evolution of the bound
                            states of a quantum particle as the conﬁning potential is changed from a box to a
                            harmonic potential well (see ﬁgure). While the wavefunctions and energies evolve,
                            the topological characteristics of the wavefunctions, i.e. the number of the nodes,
                            and therefore the assignment of the corresponding quantum numbers, remain
                            unchanged.
                              5.2 Ground state energy of the interacting electron gas                        211

   The starting point of Fermi liquid theory is a few phenomenological assumptions, all
rooted in the adiabaticity principle. For example, it is postulated that the density of quasi-
particles can be described in terms of a momentum-dependent density distribution n(p)
which, in the limit of zero interaction, evolves into the familiar Fermi distribution. From
this assumption (and a few more postulates) a broad spectrum of observables can be ana-
lyzed without further “microscopic” calculation. Its remarkable success (as well as the few
notorious failures) has made Landau Fermi liquid theory a powerful tool in the development
of modern condensed matter physics but one which we are not going to explore in detail.16
Instead, motivated in part by the phenomenological success of the “adiabatic continuity,”
we will continue with the development of a microscopic theory of the weakly interacting
three-dimensional electron gas, with rs  1.



                                            Perturbative approach
The starting point of the perturbative analysis is the functional representation of the free
energy F = −T ln Z through the quantum partition function. (Here, as usual, we set kB =
1.) Expressed as a coherent state path integral, Z = D(ψ̄, ψ) e−S[ψ̄,ψ] , where

                                           
                                       p2            T 
        S[ψ, ψ̄] =         ψ̄pσ −iωn +    − μ ψpσ +       ψ̄p+qσ ψ̄p −qσ V (q)ψp σ ψpσ .
                         p
                                       2m           2L3 
                                                                         pp q


Here, for brevity, we have introduced the “4-momentum” p ≡ (p, ωn ) comprising both
frequency and momentum.17 As with the Green function discussed in the previous section,
the free energy can be expanded in terms of an interaction parameter. To ﬁx a reference
scale against which to compare the correlation energies, let us begin by computing the free
energy Eq. (4.41) of the non-interacting electron gas:
                                                                                       
                                         −β(p2 /2m−μ)       T →0                    p2             2
        F   (0)
                  = −T        ln 1 + e                      −→                         −μ       ≃ − N μ,   (5.19)
                         pσ
                                                                                    2m             5
                                                                   p2 /2m<μ,σ


where μ ≡ p2F /2m, N = (23/2 /3π 2 )m3/2 L3 μ3/2 is the number of particles, and the last
estimate is obtained by replacing the sum over momenta by an integral. According to
Eq. (5.19), the average kinetic energy per particle is equal to 3/5 of the Fermi energy. To
relate this scale to the density parameter rs , we choose to measure all energies in units of
the Rydberg energy (alias the ionization energy of hydrogen), ERy = me4 /22 = 13.6 eV,

                                                    F (0)  N
                                                          ∼ 2.                                             (5.20)
                                                    ERy    rs


16
     Interested readers are referred to one of several excellent reviews, e.g. P. W. Anderson, Basic Notions in
     Condensed Matter Physics (Benjamin, 1984).
17
     Notice that “4-momentum” p and the modulus of the “3-momentum”, p = |p|, are denoted by the same symbol
     (standard notation!). However, in its context, this should not cause confusion.
212                                           Perturbation theory

  If we turn now to the discussion of interactions, a formal expansion of F to ﬁrst order in
V gives
                                 B                                     C
                      (1)    T2 
                     F =               ψ̄p+qσ ψ̄p −qσ V (q)ψp σ ψpσ ,             (5.21)
                            2L3             pp q                                    0

where · · · 0 denotes the functional average with respect to the non-interacting action. The
two18 diagrams contributing to this expression are shown in the ﬁgure overleaf. To account
for the speciﬁcs of the electron gas, we are using a diagrammatic code slightly diﬀerent from
that of the previous section:

     The Coulomb interaction is represented by a wavy line labeled by the momentum argu-
     ment q.
     A contraction ψpσ ψ̄pσ 0 is indicated by a solid arrow representing the free Green func-
     tion of the electron gas,
                                                     1
                                       Gp ≡            p2
                                                              ,                         (5.22)
                                             −iωn + 2m    −μ
     i.e. the inverse of the free action. The labeling of the contraction by an arrow (instead
     of a unidirectional line as in φ4 -theory) is motivated by two considerations: ﬁrstly, the
     mnemonic has the eﬀect of indicating that a contraction ψη ψ̄λ 0 describing the creation
     of an electron with quantum numbers λ, followed by the annihilation of an electron at η,
     is a directed process; secondly, there are situations (e.g. when a magnetic ﬁeld is present)
     where ψnσ (r)ψ̄nσ (r ) 0 = ψnσ (r )ψ̄nσ (r) 0 .
     The sum of all 4-momenta emanating from an interaction vertex formed by a wavy line
     and two electron ﬁeld lines is equal to zero (exercise) – the “Kirchhoﬀ law.”
     Finally, we have to be careful about sign factors arising when Grassmann variables are
     interchanged. However, the anti-commutativity of the ﬁelds merely leads to an overall
     factor (−)Nl , where Nl is the number of loops of a diagram. (To verify this claim, one may
     notice that a loop is formed by a “ringwise contraction” ψ̄1 ψ2 ψ̄3 . . . ψN 0 , (2 → 3)(4 →
     5) . . . ((N − 2) → (N − 1))(N → 1). The last contraction introduces the minus sign.)

                                       First-order perturbation theory
Turning to the discussion of the speciﬁc diagrams shown in the ﬁgure below, we notice
that the ﬁrst, generally known as a Hartree contribution, vanishes. Technically, this is a
                                                       consequence of the fact that the
  Douglas R. Hartree, 1897–1958                        interaction line connecting the two
  Originally appointed as a professor of applied math-
  ematics he became one of the ﬁrst “computational
                                                       loops carries zero momentum. How-
  physicists.” He developed methods for numerically    ever, as discussed in Section 2.2,
  solving the Schrödinger equation, among them the    V (q = 0) = 0. Physically, the van-
  celebrated “Hartree approximation.”                  ishing of the Hartree contribution is
                                                       a consequence of charge neutrality.

18
     Remember that, in a theory with complex or Grassmann ﬁelds, only contractions ∼ ψ̄ψ0 exist, i.e. there is a
     total of n! distinct contributions to a contraction ψ̄ψ . . . ψ0 of 2n ﬁeld operators.
                         5.2 Ground state energy of the interacting electron gas                  213
                                                  
Indeed, the two Green function loops        p Gp measure the local particle density of the
electron gas (cf. the discussion on page 171). Global charge neutrality requires that the
electronic density cancels against the density of the ionic background. However, notice that
this cancellation mechanism relies on our assumption of overall spatial homogeneity.
Only in a spatially uniform system does the density of the
electron gas locally compensate the positive counter-density.
In realistic metals, the inevitable presence of impurities breaks                         q=0
translational invariance and there is no reason for the Hartree                       p                 p
contribution to vanish. Indeed, the analysis of Hartree-type
contributions to the correlation energy in disordered electronic
media is a subject of ongoing research.                                                   p+q
   While the Hartree term describes the classical interaction
of charge densities through the Coulomb potential, the second                              q
diagram shown in the ﬁgure, known as a Fock contribution,                                  p
is quantum. Translating the diagrammatic language back into
Green functions, we obtain

                                              T2 
                           F (1)    =     −        Gp Gp V (p − p )
                                              L3 
                                                 p,p

                                            1                        e2
                                    =     − 3    nF (p )nF (p )
                                           L   
                                                                   |p − p |2
                                                 p,p

                                   T →0       1           e2         e2 L3 p4F
                                    =     −                   
                                                                   =−           .               (5.23)
                                              L  , <μ |p − p |
                                               3                 2     (2π)4
                                                  p    p



Here, the sign factor in the ﬁrst equality is due to the odd number of fermion loops, and the
evaluation of the last sum, which can be found, for example, in the text by Kittel,19 is left
as an exercise. (Up to numerical factors, the result follows from dimensional considerations.
We are integrating the inverse square of the distance in momentum space ([momentum]−2 )
over two Fermi spheres ([momentum]6 ). Since the integral is convergent at low momenta, it
must scale as the fourth power of the upper cutoﬀ ∼ p4F .)           Γ(x)
                                                                     4
Division by the Rydberg energy leads to the scaling
                                                                     3
                        F (1)           N
                              = const. · ,                  (5.24)   2
                        ERy             rs
                                                                     1
where the constant is of order unity. This result con-
                                                                                                        x
forms with our previous estimate of the density depen-                          0.5         1     1.5
dence of correlation energies.


19
     C. Kittel, Quantum Theory of Solids (Wiley, 1963).
214                                            Perturbation theory

     INFO A closer analysis shows that other predictions following from Eq. (5.23) are less sensible.
     To understand what goes wrong, let us rewrite the sum of F (0) and F (1) as
                                       ⎛                              ⎞
                                        p 2
                                                     1          e 2
                      (0)
                    F +F    (1)
                                =      ⎝     −μ− 3                    ⎠.
                                         2m         L  <μ |p − p |2
                                         |p|<pF                      p


     This way of writing suggests that the interaction of an electron of momentum p with all partner
     electrons of momentum p leads to a reduction20 of the single particle energy by an amount
          
     L−3   <μ e2 /|p − p |2 .
             p
       Evaluation of the internal sum (exercise) leads to21
                                             p2           e2 pF
                                                                            
                           F (0) + F (1) =            −μ−         Γ(|p|/pF ) ,
                                                  2m         2π
                                               |p|<pF
                                                 
                                       2     1+x 
     where the function Γ(x) = 2 + 1−x
                                     x
                                         ln  1−x  is shown in the ﬁgure. The most important charac-
     teristic of the scaling function Γ is a logarithmically diverging derivative at x = 1 (exercise). To
     appreciate the consequences of this feature, let us consider the single particle density of states
                                        p2     2
     ρ() = pσ δ( − p ), where p = 2m     − e 2π
                                                  pF
                                                     Γ(p/pF ) is the ﬁrst-order Fock single-particle energy.
     Approximating the sum by an integral, we obtain
                                                                            −1
                                      L3 ∞ 2                       L3 p2 dp
                               ρ() = 2        p dp δ( − p ) =                  ,
                                      π 0                           π2     dp
     where p is deﬁned through p = . The singularity of the derivative of Γ(p/pF ) at p = pF
     implies that the density of states is predicted to vanish as  approaches the Fermi energy, clearly
     a nonsensical result.22 The origin of this pathological divergence can be traced back to the long-
     range (|r|−1 → |q|−2 ) decay of the Coulomb potential (cf. Eq. (5.21)). Yet we know that, in
     systems with mobile charge carriers, electrostatic forces are screened, i.e. they decay exponen-
     tially. Microscopically, screening is due to the polarization of a medium in response to an applied
     electric ﬁeld. This by itself is an interaction eﬀect, albeit one of “higher order” in the Coulomb
     interaction, i.e. if we ever want to observe signatures of the screening mechanism, we need to
     advance to higher orders in the expansion in V .


                                     Second-order perturbation theory
Let us then consider the second-order contribution
                                     ⎛                                     ⎞2 Cc
                               2 B 
                        T    T       ⎝
              F (2) = −                   ψ̄p+qσ ψ̄p −qσ V (q)ψp σ ψpσ ⎠ ,
                        2 2L3                     pp q
                                                                                                0

where the superscript indicates that only connected diagrams contribute.

20
   Why a reduction? Charge neutrality implies that the classical correlation energy vanishes. However, being
   fermionic in nature, electrons tend to avoid each other even more than classical particles, i.e. quantum statistics
   leads to a lowering of the correlation energy below the classical value of zero.
21
   See, e.g., J. Hubbard, The description of collective motion in terms of many-body perturbation theory, Proc.
   Roy. Soc. (London) A243 (1957), 336.
22
   The majority of transport observables in metals are proportional to the density of states at the Fermi energy,
   i.e. ρ(μ) = 0 would entail the vanishing of almost all transport coeﬃcients!
                           5.2 Ground state energy of the interacting electron gas                                215

     EXERCISE Using the ﬁeld integral representation of Z, show that second-order
                                                                              (.        expansion of
                                                                                    /              2 )
     F = −T ln Z in the interaction operator Sint leads to F (2) = −(T /2) Sint   2
                                                                                      0
                                                                                        −   Sint 0 .
     Convince yourself that the second term cancels disconnected diagrams. Apply arguments similar
     to those involved in the proof of the linked cluster theorem to verify that the cancellation of
     disconnected graphs pertains to all orders in the expansion of F . I.e. the free energy can be
     obtained by expanding the partition function Z (not its logarithm) and keeping only connected
     diagrams; dropping disconnected contributions is equivalent to taking the logarithm.

Connected contraction of the eight ﬁeld operators leads to four distinct types of diagram
(exercise) of which two are of Hartree type (i.e. contain a zero-momentum interaction line
V (q = 0)). The non-vanishing diagrams F (2),1 and F (2),2 are shown in the ﬁgure below.23
Translating these diagrams to momentum summations over Green functions, one obtains
(exercise)

                                         T3 
                     F (2),1    =    −             Gp Gp +q Gp2 Gp2 +q V (q)2 ,
                                         L6 p ,p ,q 1 1
                                             1       2

                                     1 T3 
                     F (2),2    =                Gp Gp−q1 Gp−q1 −q2 Gp−q2 V (q1 )V (q2 ).                      (5.25)
                                     2 L6 p,q ,q
                                                 1       2


While, at ﬁrst sight, these expressions do not look very illuminating, closer inspection reveals
some structure. Reﬂecting the fact that electronic transport in solids is carried by excitations
at the Fermi energy, the electron Green function (5.22) assumes large values for momenta
p ≃ pF . This implies that only conﬁgurations where all momentum arguments carried by the
Green function are close to the Fermi surface contributes signiﬁcantly to the sums (5.25).
Considering the ﬁrst sum, we see that, for small |q| and |pi | ≃ pF , this condition is met,
i.e. there are two unbound summations over momentum shells around the Fermi surface.
However, with the second sum, the situation is less favourable. For ﬁxed |p1 | ≃ pF , ﬁne-
tuning of both q1 and q2 is necessary to bring all momenta close to pF , i.e. eﬀectively one
momentum summation is frozen out. There is no need to enter into detailed calculations to
predict that, due to the relatively larger “phase volume,” F (2),1 /F (2),2  1, where the ratio
will be proportional to the area of the Fermi surface which, in turn, is proportional to the
density of the electron gas. For large densities, the second Fock diagram can be neglected
in comparison with the ﬁrst.




23
     In fact, one more non-vanishing contribution is obtained by drawing a single “ring” of Green functions contain-
     ing two non-crossing interaction lines. This diagram, and its obvious generalization to higher order processes
     containing sequential “self–interactions” of a single Green function do not play an essential role (in the present
     context.) The reasons why will become clear in section 5.3 when we introduce the notion of self-energies.
216                                            Perturbation theory




                                   (a)                          (b)


Figure 5.6 Diagram of second-order Fock contributions to the free energy of the electron gas.
(a) Interaction process involving a single electron–hole pair. An electron is virtually excited
above the Fermi energy, and subsequently recombines with a hole state left behind by a second
electron excitation which then jumps into the hole created by the initial excitation. (b) Virtual
excitation of independent electron–hole pairs.


  Of course, there must be a ‘more physical’ way of under-
standing this observation. The Green function lines in the
diagrams F (2),i describe the propagation of quasi-particles F (2),1
and quasi-holes24 on the background of the interacting
medium. Now, the diagram F (2),2 contains a simply con-
nected propagator line: a single particle–hole excitation
undergoes a second-order interaction process with itself
(see Fig. 5.6(a)). By contrast, the ﬁrst diagram F (2),1
                                                               (2),2
involves two independent electron–hole excitations, as F
shown in Fig. 5.6(b). Since, in a dense electron gas, a
second-order interaction process will more likely involve
diﬀerent particles, this type of contribution is more important. Notice that the process
shown in Fig. 5.6(b) can be interpreted as a “polarization” of the medium due to the
excitation of electron–hole pairs.

                                    Higher orders in perturbation theory
The picture above readily generalizes to interaction processes of higher order. In the high-
density limit, dominant contributions to the free energy should contain one free integration
over the Fermi momentum per interaction process. A moment’s
thought shows that only diagrams of “ring graph” structure (see the
ﬁgure) meet this condition. Expanding the free energy functional to
nth order in the interaction operator, and retaining only diagrams
of that structure, one obtains
                               6                    7n
              (n)       T  2T            
             FRPA = −               V (q)   Gp Gp+q    .     (5.26)
                       2n q      L3       p

(To understand the origin of the multiplicative factor 1/n, notice
that F (n) results from the connected contraction of an operator ∼

24
     In principle, the system consists of physical electrons immersed into a globally positive background. However
     (cf. the discussion of Section 2.2), keeping in mind that at low temperatures dynamical processes take place in
     the immediate vicinity of the Fermi surface, a more problem-oriented way of thinking about states is in terms
     of quasi-particles and quasi-holes, i.e. electronic states immediately above and below the Fermi surface.
                         5.2 Ground state energy of the interacting electron gas                             217

(n!)−1 (Sint [ψ̄, ψ])n c0 . There are (n−1)! diﬀerent ways of arranging the interaction operators
Sint in a ring-shaped structure, i.e. the diagram carries a global factor (n − 1)!/n! = 1/n.)
  In Eq. (5.26) the subscript “RPA” stands for random phase approximation.25 How-
ever, more important than the designation are the facts: (a) we have managed to identify
a particularly relevant subclass of diagrams contributing to the plethora of interaction pro-
cesses; (b) there is a physical parameter controlling the dominance of these diagrams; and
(c) we are apparently able to sum up the entire series of nth-order RPA-interaction contri-
butions. Indeed, summation over n leads to the simple result
                                      (n)       T 
                             FRPA ≡      FRPA =        ln (1 − V (q)Πq ) ,                 (5.27)
                                       n
                                                  2 q

where we have introduced the polarization operator,26

                                                   2T 
                                           Πq ≡         Gp Gp+q .                                         (5.28)
                                                   L3 p

Equation (5.27) represents our ﬁrst example of an inﬁnite-order expansion. However, before
turning to the discussion of further aspects of inﬁnite-order perturbation theory, let us stay
for a moment with the RPA free energy. Speciﬁcally, let us investigate whether the RPA
repairs the pathology in the Fermi surface density of states observed above.
  The last unknown we need to compute before turning to the discussion of the RPA free
energy is the polarization operator. Drawing on the frequency summation in Problem 4.5,
the polarization operator can be written explicitly as
              2T         1             1             2  nF (p+q ) − nF (p )
        Πq = 3                                    = 3                           .       (5.29)
              L p −iωn + ξp −iωn+m + ξp+q            L p iωm + ξp+q − ξp

The evaluation of the momentum sum is straightforward if a bit tedious. As a result of the
calculation outlined in the Info block below one obtains
                                                                
                                            iωm        iωm + vF q
                         Πq,ωm = −ν0 1 −          ln                ,               (5.30)
                                            2vF q      iωm − vF q

where
                                                          
                             1                                 d3 p            mpF
                        ν0 ≡ d    δ(μ − p ) = 2                     δ(p − μ) = 2 ,                      (5.31)
                            L p,σ                              (2π)3             π

25
   The attribute “random phase” seems to allude to the fact that the quantum mechanical phase carried by the
   particle–hole excitations stirred up by interactions gets lost after each elementary polarization process. This
   contrasts with more-generic contributions to F where quantum phases may survive more complex interaction
   processes. Also notice that more than one approximation scheme in statistical physics has been dubbed “random
   phase.”
26
   The deﬁnition (5.28) applies to the speciﬁc case of a three-dimensional translationally invariant system. More
   generally, the polarization operator is deﬁned as the frequency/momentum Fourier transform of the connected
   average
                                                                      
                                     ψ̄(x, τ )ψ(x, τ )ψ̄(x , τ )ψ(x , τ )c .
218                                            Perturbation theory

is the density of states per volume of non-interacting electrons at the Fermi surface.
     INFO For an isotropic three-dimensional system at zero temperature, the polarization operator
     (5.29) becomes a function of |q| and ωn , known as the Lindhard function. The evaluation
     of the momentum sum is greatly simpliﬁed by noting that, due to the diﬀerence of the Fermi
     functions, only momenta with |p| ≃ pF signiﬁcantly contribute. Assuming that |q|                   pF , we may
     thus eﬀect the linearization ξp+q − ξp = (1/m)p · q + O(q 2 ), where the term of O(q 2 ) is negligibly
     small. Similarly, nF (p+q ) − nF (p ) ≃ ∂p nF (p )(1/m)p · q ≃ −δ(p − μ)(1/m)p · q, where, in the
     zero-temperature limit, the last equality becomes exact. Converting the momentum sum into an
     integral, we thus obtain
                                                
                                                      d3 p
                                                                            1
                                                                               p·q
                                Πq,ωm = −2                  δ(p − μ)       m
                                                                                        .
                                                     (2π) 3
                                                                       iωm + m   1
                                                                                   p·q
                                                                     
     Setting 1/(2π)3 d3 p = 1/(2π)3 dp p2 dΩ, where                        dΩ is the integral over the three-
     dimensional unit sphere, and p = pn, with |n| = 1, the integral can be evaluated, thus:
                                                  
                                    2                                      vF n · q
                Πq,ωm = −                   dp p 2
                                                       dΩ δ(p − μ)
                                 (2π)3                                iωm + vF n · q
                                                                            
                                    2                                    1              vF n · q
                          = −               dp p 2
                                                       dΩ  δ( p − μ)           dΩ
                                  (2π)3                                  dΩ          iωm + vF n · q
                                                                 
                                                  ν0
                                                                                                  
                                 ν0 1              vF xq                      iωm         iωm + vF q
                          = −            dx                    = −ν0 1 −            ln                  .
                                  2 −1        iωm + vF xq                     2vF q       iωm − vF q

To obtain the free energy, we need
to substitute the Lindhard func-        Murray Gell-Mann 1929–
tion into Eq. (5.27) and sum over       Nobel Laureate in Physics in 1969
q = {q, ωm }. Yet, due to the com-      “for his contributions and discov-
                                        eries concerning the classiﬁcation
plicated dependence of the function     of elementary particles and their
Πq,ωm on its arguments, this ﬁnal       interactions.” Among his many
part of the calculation is far from     accomplishments, he formulated
                                        the quark model of hadronic res-
trivial. An asymptotic expression       onances, and identiﬁed the SU(3) ﬂavor symme-
for the high-density expansion of       try of the light quarks, extending isospin to include
the RPA approximation to F was          strangeness, which he also discovered. (Image c
                                        The Nobel Foundation.)
ﬁrst obtained in a famous study by
                          27
Gell-Mann and Brueckner. Measuring in atomic units, they obtained the free energy per
particle of
                              FRPA
                                    = −0.142 + 0.0622 ln rs .                             (5.32)
                             ERy N
For a derivation of this result we refer the interested reader to the literature. (In the late
1950s, motivated largely by applications to the physics of heavy nuclei, the perturbative
calculation of ground state energies had become an industry. A comprehensive discussion of

27
     M. Gell-Mann and K. Brueckner, Correlation energy of an electron gas at high density, Phys. Rev. 106 (1957),
     364–8. To explore this and related literature, it is useful to refer to D. Pines, The Many-Body Problem (Ben-
     jamin, 1962) where the important reprints are collected.
                           5.2 Ground state energy of the interacting electron gas                                219

the subject, and details of the asymptotic rs - expansion of FRPA can be found, for example,
in Mahan.28 ) When added to the kinetic energy Eq. (5.20) and the ﬁrst-order correlation
energy Eq. (5.24), the structure of the density expansion of the free energy becomes clear:
the sum over all RPA diagrams yields the coeﬃcient of O(rs0 ) in the expansion in rs .29
   More important for our present discussion is the conceptual meaning of the RPA, notably
the connection to screening. To this end, let us temporarily consider the expectation value
of the particle number N = −∂μ F , rather than the free energy itself. Speciﬁcally, we wish
to compare the ﬁrst order correction (with the non-interacting result) N (1) = −∂μ F to the
RPA, NRPA = −∂μ FRPA . Noting that ∂μ Gp = −(Gp )2 we readily ﬁnd (cf. Eq. (5.23))
                                                   2T 2 
                                      N (1) = −            (Gp )2 Gp+q V (q).
                                                    L3 p,q

After a second diﬀerentiation, ρ(1) = ∂μ N (1) , this expression would lead to the pathological
density of states, a consequence of the unscreened interaction line. (The diagrammatic
visualization of N (1) is shown in Fig. 5.7(a).) Now, consider the μ-derivative of FRPA ,
Eq. (5.27):

               T  V (q)∂μ Πq    T2    V (q)    
     NRPA =                    =− 3                Gp+q (Gp )2 + (q ↔ −q)
               2 q 1 − V (q)Πq   L q 1 − V (q)Πq p
                  2T 2    V (q)                        2T 2           
            =−                        G p+q (G p ) 2
                                                     = −        V eﬀ (q)   Gp+q (Gp )2 , (5.33)
                   L3 q 1 − V (q)Πq p                     L3 q           p

where we have deﬁned the “eﬀective” interaction
                                                          1        V (q)
                                       Veﬀ (q) ≡                 ≡       ,                                     (5.34)
                                                    V (q)−1 − Πq   (q)
with the generalized dielectric function

                                                (q) ≡ 1 − V (q)Πq .                                           (5.35)

   Structurally, the expression for NRPA resembles the ﬁrst-order expression N (1) , only with
the “bare” Coulomb interaction replaced by the eﬀective interaction Veﬀ . From its deﬁnition,
it is clear that Veﬀ represents a geometric series over polarization bubbles, augmented by
bare interaction lines. This is visualized in Fig. 5.7(b), where the fat line is deﬁned in the
bottom part of the ﬁgure. In fact, we do not need to stare at the analytical expression
(5.33) to understand its origin. The μ-diﬀerentiation acting on FRPA may pick any of the
                           (n)
n rings contributing to FRPA in Eq. (5.26). The “diﬀerentiated ring” becomes the bubble
in Fig. 5.7, while all other rings conspire to form the (n − 1)th-order contribution to the
eﬀective interaction line.

28
     G. Mahan, Many Particle Physics (Plenum Press, 1981).
29
     Here we follow a convention (used mostly in the older literature) where the RPA starts from the second-order
     ring diagram F (2),1 . However, henceforth we will refer to the “RPA” as the sum over all ring diagrams, including
     the ﬁrst, F (1) .
220                                       Perturbation theory

                     p+q                    p+q

                      q                        q
                      p                        p

                      (a)                      (b)


                        =         +                  +                           + ...


                        =         +


Figure 5.7 Diagrammatic visualization of expectation value of the particle number. (a) First-order
Fock correction and (b) the RPA approximation, where the deﬁnition of the RPA interaction line
is shown in the bottom part of the ﬁgure.


   At this stage, the connection between RPA and the collective electromagnetic response
of the charged system becomes discernible. We remember that the electric ﬁeld E in a
medium is related to the vacuum ﬁeld D through the relation D(q, ω) = (q, ω)E(q, ω),
where the dielectric function (q, ω) = 1+4πχ(q, ω) is determined by the electromagnetic
susceptibility, i.e. a function that measures the tendency of the medium to “respond”
or adjust to an external electromagnetic perturbation. Identifying E(D) with the gradient
of the “dressed” potential Veﬀ (the “bare” potential V ), we conclude that, on the level of
the microscopic theory, 4πχ(q, ω) = −V (q)Πq,ωn , i.e. the susceptibility is proportional to
the polarization operator Πq . These connections motivate the introduction of the dielectric
function as in Eq. (5.35) above.
   The full complexity of the polarization of the dense homogeneous electron gas is encoded
by the Lindhard function (5.30). However, there are some interesting limiting cases, where
the situation simpliﬁes. Inspection of Eq. (5.30) shows that the Lindhard function depends
on the dimensionless ratio between two characteristic length scales: the “wavelength” q −1 ,
and the distance vF /ω an excitation propagating with Fermi velocity travels during the time
ω −1 . For small frequencies, vF /ω  q −1 , the electron gas has enough time to optimally
adjust to the spatial variation ∼ q −1 of the potential, i.e. to screen out electro-neutrality
                                                                                 ωqvF
violating potential ﬂuctuations. In this static limit, we may expand Πq,ωm = −ν0 +
O(ω/vF q). In this case, the electron gas interacts through the eﬀective potential,

                             ωqvF         1                  4πe2          4πe2
                   Veﬀ (q)    =                      =                 ≡           ,
                                      V (q)−1 + ν0       q 2 + 4πe2 ν0   q 2 + λ−2
                                 −1/2
where the constant λ ≡ 4πe2 ν0           is known as the Thomas–Fermi screening length.
Indeed, it is straightforward to verify that the inverse Fourier transform leads to an eﬀective
interaction potential

                                                          −|r|/λ
                                          Veﬀ (r) = e2 e |r| ,                             (5.36)


i.e. the potential is exponentially supressed, or screened, on length scales |r| > λ.
                      5.2 Ground state energy of the interacting electron gas                       221

  EXERCISE To verify Eq. (5.36), introduce polar coordinates q = (q, θ, φ) in q-space and per-
  form ﬁrst the elementary integrations over φ and θ. It is then straightforward to complete the
  remaining q-integration over the radial coordinate by analogy to the contour integral (5.13).

  INFO Let us brieﬂy recapitulate the heuristic interpretation of Thomas–Fermi screening.
  Imagine a test charge e has been immersed in an electron gas. The host system will respond to
  this perturbation by a local distortion of its density. To compute the distortion, we note that
  the eﬀective potential Veﬀ (r) created by the test charge changes the electronic energy levels
  according to p → p − Veﬀ . (Here, we assume that the external perturbation changes so slowly
  that the simultaneous usage of momentum and coordinate quantum numbers is not in conﬂict
  with the uncertainty relation.) The induced charge density thus reads as
                                                                                    
                               d3 p                                                     d3 p
          ρind (r) = −e             [n F ( p − V eﬀ (r)) −  n F ( p )] ≈ eV eﬀ (r)         ∂ nF (p )
                              (2π)3                                                    (2π)3
                                             
                       T →0                        d3 p
                        ≃ −eVeﬀ (r) d                   δ( − p ) δ( − μ) = −eVeﬀ (r)ν0 ,
                                                 (2π)3
                                                                
                                                      ν()

  where in the second equality we assumed weakness of the induced potential and in the third
  equality used the low-temperature approximation ∂ nF () ≃ −δ( − μ). A substitution of this
  result into the Fourier transform of the Poisson equation ∇2 Veﬀ (r) = −4πeρ(r) = −4πe(eδ(r) +
  ρind (r)) gives
                                                         4πe2
                                         Veﬀ (q) =                      .
                                                     q 2 + 4πe2 ν   0

We also note that Thomas–Fermi screening repairs our problem with the density of states.
The pathology discussed on page 213 found its origin in the (1/q 2 )-singularity of the
unscreened potential. This IR singularity is now cut oﬀ at momenta q ∼ λ−1 , implying
benign behavior of the density of states. Using the fact that the density parameter rs scales
with the Fermi energy as (exercise) rs ∼ μ−1/2 , and diﬀerentiating ρ = ∂μ2 F , it is indeed
straightforward to verify that the RPA expansion of F no longer leads to singular behavior
of ρ at the Fermi energy.
   It is also interesting to consider the limit vF /ω  q −1 of essentially dynamic polariza-
tion. Expansion of Πq,ωm in Eq. (5.30) to ﬁrst order in vF q/ω  1 leads to the expression
                                         4πe2      1           4πe2 1
                        Veﬀ (q, ωm ) =                     2 =               ,
                                                         2
                                          q 2 1 + 4πν0 e2 vF    q 2 1 − ωp22
                                                       3ωm                  ω

where ωp ≡ (4πne2 /m)1/2 denotes the plasma frequency and we have used the fact that
(exercise) the particle density n ≡ N/L3 = 2kF3 /6π 2 . In fact, the form of the denominator
hints at a collective instability of the electron gas at frequencies ∼ ωp . Referring for a more
rigorous discussion to the next chapter, one can understand the origin of the instability by
another heuristic argument. What we need to remember is that the current formalism is
222                                          Perturbation theory

developed for imaginary times τ . Eventually we will be
interested in real-time dynamics, i.e. we need to analyt-
ically continue back to t ∼ −iτ . In the language of fre-
quencies, this amounts to an analytic continuation process
                                                                                           E
from Matsubara frequencies to real frequencies, iωm → ω.
Sloppily substituting a real frequency
                                      into
                                         −2the potential, we
obtain Veﬀ (q, ωm → −iω) ∝ 1 − ωp2 /ω 2      , i.e. the system
seems to respond singularly to excitations with frequency
ω ∼ ωp . The cause of this instability is the well-known
                                                                                                          x
plasmon mode of the electron gas.



     INFO The physics of the plasmon mode can be understood as follows. Imagine the electron
     gas uniformly displaced by a distance x against the positively charged background (see ﬁgure).
     This will lead to the formation of oppositely charged surface layers at the two ends of the system.
     The surface charge densities ρ± = ±exn lead to an electric ﬁeld E = 4πenx directed opposite
     to the displacement vector. Mobile charge carriers inside the system are thus subject to a force
     −4πe2 nx. The solution of the equation of motion mẍ = −4πe2 nx oscillates at a frequency
     ωp = (4πe2 n/m)1/2 , the plasma frequency. Since the motion of the charge carriers is in turn
     responsible for the accumulation of the charged surface layers, we conclude that the system
     performs a collective oscillatory motion, known as the plasmon excitation.



At this point we conclude our preliminary discussion of the electron gas. We have seen that
large-order perturbation theory can be applied to successfully explain various features of
the interacting system: energetic lowering due to quantum correlation, screening, and even
collective instabilities.
   The interacting electron gas is but one example of the many applications of the diagram-
matic perturbation theory. After the full potential of the approach had become evident – in
the late 1950s and early 1960s – diagrammatic techniques of great sophistication were devel-
oped, and applied to a plethora of many-body problems. Indeed, more than two decades
passed before large-order perturbation theory eventually ceased to be the most important
tool of theoretical condensed matter physics. Reﬂecting the great practical relevance of the
approach, there is a huge body of textbook literature concentrating on perturbative meth-
ods.30 Although it would make little sense to develop the ﬁeld in its full depth once again,
a few generally important concepts of diagrammatic perturbation theory are summarized
in the next section.



30
     See, e.g., A. A. Abrikosov, L. P. Gorkov, and I. E. Dzyaloshinkii, Methods of Quantum Field Theory in
     Statistical Physics (Dover Publications, Inc., 1975), A. Fetter and J. D. Walecka, Quantum Theory of Many-
     Particle Systems (McGraw-Hill, 1971), D. Pines and P. Nozières, The Theory of Quantum Liquids – Normal
     Fermi Liquids (Addison-Wesley, 1989), and S. Doniach and E. H. Sondheimer, Green Functions for Solid State
     Physicists (Benjamin/Cummings, 1974).
                                          5.3 Inﬁnite-order expansions                                          223

                                      5.3 Inﬁnite-order expansions
Turning back to the prototypical φ4 -model, it is the purpose of the present section to
introduce a number of general concepts of inﬁnite-order perturbative summations. As should
be clear from the discussion above, a meaningful summation over an inﬁnite set of diagrams
necessitates the existence of a class of perturbative corrections that is “more important”
than others. In practice, what we need is a small parameter that discriminates between
diagrams of diﬀerent structure. In our example above, this parameter was the eﬀective
density rs of the electron gas. However, in other settings, the control parameter N may
be deﬁned quite diﬀerently: large values of a spin, S, the number of colors, Nc , in QCD,
the number of spatial dimensions, d, the number of modes of an optical wave guide, etc.
Unfortunately, in most physical contexts, these parameters are typically far from large,
S = 1/2, d = Nc = 3, etc. So we have to resort to a “poor man’s” strategy where we
develop a controlled and self-consistent theory in the limit of asymptotically large control
parameters and hope that some fragments of truth survive the limit down to more mundane
values of N . Perhaps unexpectedly, this strategy often works astonishingly well down to
values N = O(1).
  So let us, then, begin by introducing a large control parameter into a φ4 -
type theory. This can be achieved by promoting φ from a scalar to an N -
component vector ﬁeld φ = {φa }, a = 1, . . . , N . The self-interaction of the
ﬁeld is modeled as g dd x φa φa φb φb , i.e. an expression that is “rotationally” invariant in
φ-space. The action of our modiﬁed theory is thus given by
                                                                      
                                     1            r         g
                     S[φ] ≡ d x d
                                       ∂φ · ∂φ + φ · φ +       (φ · φ) ,
                                                                      2
                                                                                        (5.37)
                                     2            2        4N
where the factor 1/N in front of the interaction constant has been introduced for later
convenience.
  As before, we shall concentrate on the Green function Gab (x − y) = φa (x)φb (y) as
a “test observable.” Denoting the Green function by a bold line, the free Green function
G0 ≡ φa (x)φb (y) 0 ∝ δ ab by a thin line, and the interaction operator by a wavy line,31
the structure of the ﬁrst- and second-order expansion of the Green function is shown in
the upper portion of Fig. 5.8. For simplicity, the combinatorial factors weighting individual
diagrams have been omitted.


                                            Self-energy operator
Even without resorting to the large-N structure of the theory, it is possible to bring some
order in the spaghetti of diagrams contributing to the expansion. Indeed, there are two
distinct subclasses of diagrams: diagrams that are one-particle reducible (i.e. can be cut
into two halves by cutting a single internal line, see the classiﬁcation on page 204) and
those that are not. This observation motivates the collection of all one-particle irreducible

31
     Since the four ﬁeld vertices entering the interaction are no longer indiscriminate, the interaction “point” rep-
     resentation of Section 5.1 is no longer suitable.
224                                            Perturbation theory


                       =           +               +


                           +                           +                 +


                           +                       +                          +




                           +               +                     + ...


                       =           +               +                         + ...


                       =           +




                       =       +               +             +           +



                           +           +                   + ...

Figure 5.8 Expansion of the Green function of φ4 -theory. Bottom: expansion of the self-energy
operator.




subportions of the diagrammatic expansion into a structural unit. In Fig. 5.8 this entity,
which is commonly called the self-energy operator, and sometimes also the eﬀective
mass operator, is denoted by a hatched circle. The ﬁrst- and second-order expansion of
the self-energy is shown in the bottom part of the ﬁgure.

  With that deﬁnition, the Green
function becomes a “chain” of self-                        Freeman Dyson, 1923–
                                                           Trained as a mathematician,
energy operators, separated by free                        Dyson turned to physics in
Green function lines, as shown in                          the 1940s. His work in con-
the second equality of the ﬁgure.                          densed matter physics, statisti-
A convenient representation of the                         cal mechanics, and several other
                                                           areas has had lasting inﬂuence on
expansion is shown in the third                            the development of modern the-
equality. An insertion of the full                         oretical physics. Beyond his professional work in
Green function after the ﬁrst self-                        physics, Dyson has written several books on the
                                                           social implications of modern science. (Photo by
energy correction recursively gener-                       Randall Hagadorn. Courtesy of the Institute of
ates the full series. Let us translate                     Advanced Study.)
these statements into the language
                                        5.3 Inﬁnite-order expansions                                       225

of formulae. Denoting the set of all self-energy diagrams by Σ̂ = {Σab (x − y)},32 the
expansion of the Green function assumes the form
                     Ĝ = Ĝ0 + Ĝ0 Σ̂Ĝ0 + Ĝ0 Σ̂Ĝ0 Σ̂Ĝ0 + · · · = Ĝ0 + Ĝ0 Σ̂Ĝ.                  (5.38)
Here, the operator products involve summation over coordinates and internal indices, i.e
(ÂB̂)ab (x − y) = dd z Aac (x − z)B cb (z − y). Recursion relations of this type are commonly
referred to as Dyson equations. The Dyson equation states that the problem of calculating
Ĝ is essentially tantamount to that of analyzing the self-energy. To make this point more
explicit, let us reformulate the Dyson equation in momentum space:
                         Ĝp = Ĝ0,p + Ĝ0,p Σ̂p Ĝp ⇔ [1 − Ĝ0,p Σ̂p ]Ĝp = Ĝ0,p .
Here we have used the convolution theorem or, more physically, the fact that all scattering
processes lumped into the self-energy conserve momentum separately. Matrix multiplication
of this identity from the right by [1 − Ĝ0,p Σ̂p ]−1 leads to the expression
                                                         #           $−1
                        Ĝp = [1 − Ĝ0,p Σ̂p ]−1 Ĝ0,p = Ĝ−1
                                                           0,p − Σ̂p     .
                            #      $ab
Finally, using the fact that Ĝ−1
                               0,p     = (p2 + r)δ ab , we arrive at the formal solution

                                           #                  $ab
                                                           −1
                                        p = (p + r − Σ̂p )
                                       Gab    2
                                                                  .                                    (5.39)

This equation provides two lessons: ﬁrstly, the full information about the Green function is
indeed stored in the self-energy; secondly, the self-energy somehow “adds” to the arguments
p2 and r entering the quadratic action, a point to be discussed in more detail below.
   But how then do we compute the self-energy operator? In fact, the construction recipe
follows from what has been said above. By deﬁnition, the nth-order contributions to the self-
energy are generated by a connected and one-particle irreducible contraction of n interaction
operators (weighted with the appropriate combinatorial factor 1/n!). Two ﬁeld vertices stay
uncontracted as connectors to the free Green function lines contacting the self-energy. For
example, the ﬁrst-order contribution is given by (exercise)
                                          ⎛                             ⎞
                     #      $ab         g    1            
                       Σ(1)
                        p       = −δ ab d ⎝        G0,p +      G0,p−p ⎠ ,
                                       L    N                
                                                        p             p

where the ﬁrst (second) contribution corresponds to the ﬁrst (second) diagram in the self-
energy expansion of Fig. 5.8.
     EXERCISE Represent the second-order contribution Σ(2) in terms of Green functions.
Once the self-energy has been computed to any desired order, the result is substituted into
Eq. (5.39) and one obtains the Green function.

32
     The conservation of global momentum of the theory implies (exercise: think about it!) that, like the Green
     function, the self-energy depends only on the diﬀerence of its coordinate arguments.
226                                     Perturbation theory

  INFO The critical reader will note that there are some problems with the line of argument above.
  Firstly, we have tacitly ignored the issue of combinatorics. (How do we know that once we have
  plugged the expansion of the self-energy into the Dyson equation we get the same result as a
  brute-force direct expansion of the Green function would have obtained?) To understand that the
  two-step program – “ﬁrst compute the self-energy, and then substitute into the Dyson series” –
  indeed produces correct results, let us consider the nth-order contribution to the expansion of
  the Green function with its overall combinatorial factor 1/n!. Now imagine that we want to
  distribute those diagrams that contain, say, one free internal Green function over two self-energy
  operators according to the expression G0 ΣG0 ΣG0 . Assuming that the ﬁrst self-energy operator
                                                                                       !
  is of order m < n and the second one of order n − m, we notice that there are m    n
                                                                                         possibilities
  to distribute the interaction vertices over the two self-energies. That means that we obtain an
                                        !
                                   1 n
  overall combinatorial factor of n!  m
                                                 1
                                          = m! (n−m)! . But 1/m! and 1/(n − m)! are precisely the
  combinatorial factors that appear in the deﬁnition of an mth- and an (n − m)th-order self-
  energy operator, respectively. Arguing in reverse, we conclude that the prescription above indeed
  produces the correct combinatorics.
     A second objection concerns the consistency of the expansion, i.e. the nth-order expansion
  of the self-energy is, of course, by no means equivalent to nth-order expansion of the Green
  function, nor to any speciﬁc order of the expansion. Indeed, when working with the concept of a
  self-energy, structuring the expansion according to its order in the interaction operator does not
  make much sense. We should rather focus on the summation of speciﬁc inﬁnite-order diagram
  classes as exempliﬁed in the previous section and discussed in more general terms below.



                                      Large-N expansion
So far we have not made reference to the N -component structure of the theory. However,
let us now assume that N is very large, i.e. that we may be content with an expansion of
the Green function to leading order in 1/N . This condition can be made explicit by sending
N → ∞ and declaring limN →∞ Gaa   p to be our observable of interest.

  The limit of large N entails a
drastic simpliﬁcation of the diagram-      Max Born, 1882–1970
matic expansion. Each interaction          Worked on the mathematical
vertex comes with an overall factor        basis of quantum mechanics.
                                           Amongst his major contributions
of 1/N which must be compensated           was the interpretation of the abso-
by a summation over ﬁeld com-              lute square of the wave function
ponents to produce a contribution          as a measure of the probability
                                           of ﬁnding the particle at a given location. Born
that survives the limit N → ∞.             shared the 1954 Nobel Prize in Physics with Walter
This condition removes numerous            Bothe for “for his fundamental research in quantum
diagrams contributing to the series.       mechanics, especially for his statistical interpretation
                                           of the wavefunction.” (Image c The Nobel Foun-
For example, in the Green function         dation.)
expansion of Fig. 5.8 only the ﬁrst,
third, eighth and ninth diagrams survive the limit. In all other contributions, interaction
and Green function lines are interwoven in a way that does not leave room for one ﬁeld-index
summation per interaction vertex.
                                   5.3 Inﬁnite-order expansions                                   227

   Inspection of the series shows that only dia-
grams void of crossing interaction lines (cf. the      =           +                  + ...
ﬁgure on the right) survive the limit of large N .
The approximation – indeed in the limit of inﬁ-
nite N it becomes exact – that retains only these      =
contributions is commonly called the non-crossing approximation (NCA). More poet-
ically, the diagrams contributing to the reduced expansion are sometimes called “rainbow
diagrams.”
   Importantly, the NCA self-energy can be computed in closed form. All one has to realize
is that the summation over all rainbow diagrams amounts to substitution of the full NCA
Green function under a single interaction line (exercise). Using the fact that in the NCA
the self-energy is proportional to unity in the ﬁeld-index space, we can express this fact
through the formula
                                                                   −1
                  Σ̂p = −gL−d         Gp = −gL−d       p2 + r − Σp
                      NCA
                                                                          .          (5.40)
                                     p                  p

In the literature, this equation goes under the name self-consistent Born approxima-
tion. It is a “Born approximation” because, formally, it resembles a ﬁrst-order perturbative
correction (the overall factor of g). The approximation is “self-consistent” because the self-
energy recursively appears on the right-hand side of the equation again, i.e. the equation is
in fact not of ﬁrst but of inﬁnite order.
  INFO Although the objective of the present section is to expose general structures, let us
  brieﬂy review the solution of a Born equation. To keep things simple, let us assume that
  we are dealing with the low-energy approximation to some microscopic model, i.e. that the
  momentum summations must be cut oﬀ at some upper limit Λ. We further make the assumption
  (to be checked self-consistently) that the solution for the self-energy operator will turn out to be
  momentum-independent: Σp = Σ. This leads to the expression
                                              Λ d
                                                   d p       1
                                     Σ ≈ −g                         .
                                                 (2π)d p2 + r − Σ
  The evaluation of the integral depends on dimensionality and on the analytical structure of
  the energy denominator. For example, taking d = 2 and assuming that the parameter r is
  much smaller than the self-energy induced by scattering – an assumption also to be checked
  self-consistently later on – we obtain
                                      Λ2                         
                                   g               1     g      Λ2
                            Σ≈−           d(p2 ) 2   ≃−    ln −      .
                                  4π 0          p −Σ    4π       Σ
  A solution Σ(g, Λ) can now be sought by approximate analytical methods, or graphically. (One
  plots both sides of the equation as functions of Σ and seeks a crossing point.)
    However, for our present discussion, more important than the detailed dependence of Σ on the
  input parameters g and Λ is the principal meaning of the self-energy: apparently, Σ adds to the
  parameter r of the naked Green function. (Notice that the solution of the equation determining
  Σ will be negative.) Remembering that r ∼ ξ −1/2 , one concludes that the interaction operator
  lowers the spatial correlation of the system. This is indeed what one should expect intuitively:
  scattering due to interactions acts as a source of “disorder” inside the system.
228                                                   Perturbation theory

                         (p,a)           (p,a)
                                         (               (p′,b)

      C (4) =                        +

                     (p+q,a)             (p+q,a)         (p′+q,b)




           =                         +                            +                         +       +   . . .



                 (p,a)      (p′,b)

                                     =               +                      +   . . .   =       +

                (p+q,a) (p′+q,b)


                                     =           +           +      . . .


Figure 5.9 Expansion of the four-point function. Notice that the arrows represent the full Green
function, i.e. all diagrams “renormalizing” the two-particle subunits of the diagram are automati-
cally included.


At this stage, it is worthwhile to take a step back and see what we have achieved. We
have managed to compute the Green function to inﬁnite order in an expansion in the set
of “relevant” diagrams. How does that ﬁt together with what has been said in Section 5.1
about the “asymptotic” nature of perturbative series? In fact, the exponential proliferation
of the number of diagrams, i.e. the mechanism that led to the eventual breakdown of the
perturbative expansion, is blocked by the limit N → ∞. Only subclasses of diagrams, with
far fewer members, contribute and the series remains summable.
   The large-N principle is actually not limited to the expansion of the Green function. To
illustrate the point, let us brieﬂy consider the expansion of the four-point correlation
function
                                 1  1  a a
                         Cq(4) =                φp φ−p−q φb−p φbp +q .              (5.41)
                                 N     L2d      ab          p,p

In the next chapter we will see that objects of this architecture represent the most impor-
tant information carriers of the theory. Unlike the Green function discussed previously, they
relate directly to observable quantities. In the many-body literature, the four-point function
is described as a two-particle propagator, indicating that it describes the joint propaga-
tion of two particles. Leaving a more substantial discussion of the meaning of this object to
the next chapter, we concentrate here on the formal aspects of its perturbative expansion.
   The structure of the expansion of the four-point function is shown in Fig. 5.9 where, for
simplicity, momentum/component-indices are indicated only once. The simplest diagram
contributing to the expansion9 consists: 9of just two Green
                                                       :    functions. It encapsulates all dis-
connected contractions, i.e. φp φ−p φ−p−q φp +q ∼ δ ab δpp contributing to C (4) . All
                                 a b        a      b
                                     5.3 Inﬁnite-order expansions                              229

other contractions simultaneously involve all four ﬁeld operators, i.e. they contain interac-
tion lines between the Green functions. The sum of all these contributions is represented by
the diagram containing the hatched surface. A few low-order contributions to the expansion
are explicitly shown in the second line. Notice that all arrows appearing in these diagrams
are fat. This means that diagrams “dressing” the two-particle sub-units of the expansion
are automatically included. For example, the second contribution, containing just a single
interaction line between the two-particle propagators, in fact represents an entire series of
diagrams obtained by substituting the expansion of Fig. 5.8 for the full Green function. (In
an analytical calculation, one will take account of these contributions simply by substitution
of the self-energy renormalized Green function for each arrow.)
  EXERCISE Write down the analytical expressions contributing to the low-order diagrams shown
  in the ﬁrst and second lines of the ﬁgure.

All diagrams involving interactions between the two Green functions have the common factor
that they contain four external “legs,” i.e. the Green function connectors to the external
ﬁeld operators. If you imagine these legs removed, you end up with a “core contribution”
often called the vertex. (The designation is motivated by the fact that the ﬁrst contribution
to the vertex is, indeed, the contracted interaction vertex of the action; see diagram no. 2.)
In Fig. 5.9, the vertex is denoted by a tightly hatched area.
   As with the Green function, the expansion of the vertex can be given some structure.
To this end, notice that some of the diagrams contributing to the vertex (e.g. the second
diagram in the second line with external legs removed) can be cut into two just by cutting
two internal Green function lines. Vertex diagrams of this type are called two-particle
reducible, by analogy with the “one-particle reducible” contributions to the expansion
of the Green function. As with the expansion of the latter, one can lump all irreducible
contributions to the vertex (e.g. the last diagram in the ﬁrst line, or the ﬁrst diagram in
the second line, external legs removed) into a structural subunit called the irreducible
vertex. In Fig. 5.9, that unit is denoted by a lightly hatched area. The ﬁrst two diagrams
contributing to the irreducible vertex are shown in the fourth line of the ﬁgure. Here, one can
see that the irreducible vertex plays a role similar to the self-energy of the Green function.
Expressed in terms of the irreducible vertex, the expansion assumes the regular form shown
in the third line.
   To represent these graphical rela-
tions in analytical form, we denote            Hans Albrecht Bethe, 1906–
the full vertex by the symbol Γ̂ =             2005
     
       ,bb                                    Nobel Laureate in physics in 1967
{Γaa
   p,p ,q } and the irreducible ver-
                                             for his “contributions to the the-
tex by Γ̂0 = {Γaa        ,bb
                      0,p,p ,q } where the    ory of nuclear reactions, espe-
indices a, a , b, b keep track of the        cially his discoveries concerning
                                               the energy production in stars.”
index labels carried by the four               As well as nuclear matter, he has
Green functions entering the ver-              also contributed substantially to atomic and con-
tex. (Although we have deﬁned our              densed matter physics.” (Image c The Nobel Foun-
                                               dation.)
correlation function in such a way
that a = a , b = b , a generalization
230                                               Perturbation theory

to a four-fold index label is necessary to formulate the recursion Eq. (5.42).) The three
momentum arguments represent the momenta of the Green functions connecting to the
vertex operators, as indicated explicitly in the ﬁrst line of the ﬁgure. (Remember that
the theory has overall momentum conservation, i.e. three momentum arguments suﬃce to
unambiguously ﬁx the momentum dependence of Γ and C (4) .) The content of the third line
of the ﬁgure can then be expressed in terms of a closed recursion relation:

                                               1  aa ,cc                        
                      Γaa ,bb     aa ,bb
                       p,p ,q = Γ0,q,p ,p +             Γ      Gc  Gc  Γcc ,bb .                      (5.42)
                                                   Ld   0,p,p ,q p p +q p ,p ,q
                                                      c,c ,p


Equations of this type are (often) called Bethe–Salpeter equations. Comparison with
Eq. (5.38) shows that this equation appears to be conceptually similar to the Dyson equation
for the one-particle Green function.33 Indeed, the principle behind most recursion relations
of perturbation theory is a structure like


                                                X̂ = X̂0 + X̂0 ∗ Ẑ ∗ X̂,                                        (5.43)


where X̂ is our object of interest (e.g. Γ̂), X̂0 its “free” version, Ẑ a subunit that is, in
some sense, “irreducible” (Σ̂ or Γ̂0 GG), and ∗ some generalized matrix convolution.


                          C (4) =                 +                  +                 +    . . .



Figure 5.10 Large-N expansion of the two-particle correlation function into a “ladder structure”.

Owing to the importance of the two-particle propagator, the solution of Bethe–Salpeter
type equations is a central issue of many areas of many-body physics. In most cases only
approximate solutions can be obtained. With our present example, “approximate” means
that one sends N to large values and seeks a solution to leading order in N −1 . In that limit,
the only surviving contribution to the irreducible vertex is the ﬁrst, i.e. a plain interaction
line (see Fig. 5.10). As with the self-energy operator discussed in the previous section, all
diagrams with “entangled” interaction lines are frustrated in the sense that we do not have
as many index summations as interaction constants ∼ g/N . Such contributions vanish in
the limit of large N . We thus conclude that the Bethe–Salpeter equation assumes the simple
form
                                     g     g 1  a c
                        p,p ,q = −
                       Γab               −          G  G  Γcb  ,
                                    NL d   N Ld  p p +q p ,p ,q
                                                               c,p



33
     We can make the analogy perfect by deﬁning a “one-particle vertex” Γ̂(1) = Ĝ(0)−1 [Ĝ − Ĝ(0) ]Ĝ(0)−1 . Inspection
     of the second equality of Fig. 5.8 shows that the expansion of Γ(1) starts and ends with a self-energy operator,
     i.e. the ﬁrst free Green function line G0 is removed, and so are the two external G0 s connecting to the self-energy
     operator. In direct analogy to Eq. (5.42), the analytical formula for Γ(1) then reads Γ̂(1) = Σ + ΣG0 Γ̂(1) .
                                          5.3 Inﬁnite-order expansions                                          231
                                 
where Γab ≡ Γaa ,bb δ aa δ bb .34 This equation can be simpliﬁed even further by making the
ansatz Γab
         p,p ,q = Γq , where Γ is independent of discrete indices and input momenta p and
p . (When solving a perturbative recursion relation, it is always a good idea to try an ansatz
of maximal simplicity, i.e. one that is no more complex than the constituting elements of
the equation.) Then,
                               g                         g      1
                                    − gPq Γq ⇒ Γq = −
                               Γq = −                                ,             (5.44)
                              N Ld                      N Ld 1 + gPq
                                                    
where we have introduced the abbreviation Pq = L1d p Gp Gp+q . In principle, one may now
proceed by substituting the large-N expansion of the Green function (5.39) and computing
the function Pq by integration over p. This would produce a closed expression for Γ and,
by virtue of the relation
                                           
                                  (4)        1
                                C q = Pq        + N Γq Pq ,
                                             Ld
our correlation function. Since the emphasis in this section is on conceptual aspects of
perturbation theory, we will not pursue the analysis to its very end. (For an analysis of the
Bethe–Salpeter equation in a context more interesting than φ4 -theory, see the discussion of
the quantum disorder problem in the next chapter.) Yet there is one aspect of the expression
for Γq worth noticing. Consider Pq expanded as a Taylor series in q and focus on the
zeroth-order contribution, P0 . From the deﬁnition of the Green function (5.39) we have
                       1  2            1        (5.40)
                P0 = d        Gp = ∂ Σ d     Gp = −g −1 ∂Σ Σ = −g −1 .                 (5.45)
                      L p              L p

When substituted into the formula for Γ, this shows that for small momenta the expansion
of the numerator of the vertex starts with a power of q. (By symmetry, the ﬁrst non-
vanishing contribution will be of O(q 2 ).) This means that both the vertex and the four-point
correlation function are long-ranged objects, i.e. unlike the Green function, they decay not
exponentially, but as a power law. The long-range character of the four-point function has
observable consequences, as discussed in the next chapter.
   Summarizing, our discussion of the two- and four-point functions, and of the RPA theory
of the interacting electron gas has shown that, if a large parameter is present, (a) relevant
subclasses of perturbative contributions can be identiﬁed and (b) they can be summed to
inﬁnite order. As a matter of fact, there are not too many of these summable diagram classes:
ring-diagrams, rainbow-diagrams and ladder-diagrams nearly exhaust the set of “friendly”
corrections, amenable to analytical summation. Notice that, so far, we have largely restricted
ourselves to the discussion of abstract summation schemes; i.e. we still need to learn more
about the way intermediate results like Eq. (5.39) or (5.44) can be translated into concrete
physical information. These aspects are discussed – on applications more rewarding than

34
     Here we have used the fact that the large-N approximation of the irreducible vertex forces the two input indices
     a, a to be equal (and the same for the output indices). As a word of caution, strictly speaking, our large-
     N approximation of the irreducible vertex explicitly uses the fact that the input/output indices entering our
     deﬁnition of the vertex are equal, i.e. should we compute a correlation function where the two input/output
     indices are diﬀerent (a rare occurrence in realistic applications), the large-N approximation of the four-point
     functions would no longer assume the simple form of a regular ladder.
232                                        Perturbation theory

plain φ4 -theory – a little later. However, at this point we leave the discussion of formal
perturbation theory. While a state-of-the-art exposition of the subject would require much
more space – for pedagogical and condensed-matter-oriented texts on perturbative methods,
see Pines and Nozières, and Schulman35 – the material introduced in this section suﬃces
for nearly all purposes of the present text.
  Turning back to our prototypical problem of the interacting electron gas, in the next
chapter we extend the purely diagrammatic methods discussed above to a more powerful
hybrid approach comprising perturbative concepts in combination with functional methods.



                                    5.4 Summary and outlook
This concludes our preliminary introduction to the concepts of perturbation theory. We have
seen that general perturbative expansions mostly have the status of “asymptotic” rather
than convergent series. We have learned how to eﬃciently encode perturbative series by
graphical methods and how to assess the “importance” of individual contributions. Further,
we have seen how the presence of a large parameter can be utilized to ﬁrmly establish
inﬁnite-order expansions. A number of recursive techniques have been introduced to sum
up diagram sequences of inﬁnite order.
   However, a second look at the discussion of the previous sections shows that the central
tool, the functional integral, did not play much of a role. All it did was to provide the
combinatorial framework of the perturbative expansion of correlation functions. However,
for that we hardly need the full machinery of functional integration. Indeed, the foundations
of the perturbative approach were laid down in the 1950s, long before people even began
to think about the conventional path integral. (For a pure operator construction of the
perturbative expansion, see the problem set.)
   More importantly, the analysis so far has a serious methodological weakness: all subclasses
of relevant diagrams had the common feature that they contained certain “sub-units,” more
structured than the elementary propagator or the interaction line. For example, the RPA
diagrams were organized in terms of polarization bubbles, the NCA diagrams had their
rainbows, and the ladder diagrams their rungs. Within the diagrammatic approach, in each
diagram these units are reconstructed “from scratch,” i.e. in terms of elementary propaga-
tors and interaction lines. However, taking seriously the general philosophy on information
reduction declared at the beginning of the text, we should strive to make the “important”
structural elements of an expansion our elementary degrees of freedom. This program is
hardly feasible within purely diagrammatic theory. However, the functional integral is ide-
ally suited to introducing degrees of freedom hierarchically, i.e. trading microscopic objects
for entities of higher complexity. The combination of functional integral techniques with
perturbation theory presents a powerful theoretical machinery which is the subject of the
next chapter.


35
     See D. Pines and P. Nozières, The Theory of Quantum Liquids — Normal Fermi Liquids (Addison-Wesley,
     1989), and L. S. Schulman, Techniques and Applications of Path Integration (Wiley, 1981).
                                                   5.5 Problems                                    233

                                                  5.5 Problems
               Technical aspects of diagrammatic perturbation theory
Taking the second-order expansion of the φ4 Green function as an example, it is the purpose of this
problem to discuss a number of technical aspects relating to the classiﬁcation and the combinatorics of
diagrams.
                                     9                        :
(a) Show that the full contraction of φ(x)φ4 (y)φ4 (y )φ(x ) generates the 945 terms
           9G0 (x − x )G40 (0) + 72G0 (x − x )G20 (y − y )G20 (0) + 24G0 (x − x )G40 (y − y )
                   !                          !                               !            
                    1                                    2                            3


             + 36G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y)G30 (0) + 144G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y)G20 (y − y )G0 (0)
                            !                                     !                    
                                 4                                          5
                                     
              + 96G0 (x − y)G0 (x             
                                         − y )G30 (y − y )
                                !                           
                                     6
              + 144G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y )G0 (y − y )G20 (0)
                                    !                      
                                          7


             + (y ←→ y ).                                                                      (5.46)

    Try to reproduce the combinatorial prefactors.
(b) Check explicitly that the disconnected terms cancel against the “vacuum loops” from
    the expansion of the denominator.
(c) Represent the corresponding diagrams in momentum space. Convince yourself that the
    “Kirchhoﬀ law” discussed in the main text suﬃces to unambiguously ﬁx the result.

Answer:


(a) The seven distinct pairings of the ten φ-ﬁelds are shown in Fig. 5.2 (and referred to here
    as diagrams 1–7 in the order in which they appear in the ﬁgure). By way of example,
    let us consider the combinatorial factor of diagram 2. There are 3 · 2 = 6 ways to pair
    two ﬁelds φ(y) and the same for φ(y ). From these two contractions, we obtain a factor
    (6G(0))2 . Then, there are two possible ways of pairing the two remaining φ(y) with the
    two remaining φ(y ) leading to a factor 2G20 (y − y ). Finally, the pairing of φ(x) with
    φ(x ) obtains a single factor G0 (x − x ). Multiplying all contributions, we obtain term
    2.
(b) To obtain all terms contributing to G(2) , both numerator and denominator of Eq. (5.14)
    have to be expanded to second order (where the identiﬁcation X[φ] = φ(x)φ(x ) is
    understood). In symbolic notation,
          N0 + N1 + 12 N2 + · · ·                    1                     1
                                  ≃ N0 + N1 − N0 D1 + N2 − N1 D1 + N0 D12 − N0 D2 .
          1 + D1 + 2 D2 + · · ·
                   1                         !    2                      2
                                                                  !            
                                                      G(1)
                                                                            G(2)
234                                                   Perturbation theory

      The expression for N2 is given by formula (5.46). From the main text, we know that
      N1 = 3G0 (x − x )G20 (0) + 12G0 (x − y)G0 (0)G0 (y − x ) and D1 = 3G20 (0). Further,
      N0 = G0 (x − x ). Finally, D2 reads
                 9 4            :
                  φ (y)φ4 (y ) = 9G40 (0) + 72G20 (0)G20 (y − y ) + 24G40 (y − y ).

        Collecting all the terms, we obtain

         N2   −   18G0 (x − x )G40 (0) −72G0 (x − y)G30 (0)G0 (y − x ) +18G0 (x − x )G40 (0)
                                                     !               
                                                                −(4+y↔y )

                  −9G0 (x − x )G40 (0) −72G0 (x − x )G20 (0)G20 (y − y )
                          !                          !                
                                 −1                                  −2

                  −24G0 (x − x )G40 (y − y )
                             !             
                                         −3

              =   144G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y)G20 (y − y )G0 (0)
                                      !                    
                                                      5
                  + 144G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y )G0 (y− y )G20 (0)
                                        !                     
                                                          6
                  + 96G0 (x − y)G0 (x − y )G30 (y− y )
                                    !                 
                                                  7
                                     
                  +(y ←→ y ),

    i.e. the set of connected diagrams shown in Fig. 5.4.
(c) This translates to a straightforward exercise in Fourier transformation.



                         Self-consistent T-matrix approximation
As well as scattering from lattice vibrations and other electrons, the low-temperature conductivity of
a metal is heavily inﬂuenced by defects or impurities. The general role of weak impurity scattering is
discussed in some detail in Section 6.5. As a warm-up to our more comprehensive discussion below,
the aim of the present problem is to determine the scattering rate imposed by a collection of isolated
impurities using diagrammatic perturbation theory.

Consider a system of spinless electrons subject to a random pattern of Nimp non-magnetic
scattering impurities and described by the Hamiltonian Ĥ = Ĥ0 + Ĥimp , where Ĥ0 =
       †
  k k ck ck ,

                                              
                                               Nimp
                                                                                       
                                                                                       Nimp
                                                                 †
              Ĥimp = v0 a   d            d
                                         d r          δ(r − Ri )c (r)c(r) = v0 a   d
                                                                                              c† (Ri )c(Ri ),
                                               i=1                                     i=1

and we have assumed that an impurity at position Ri creates a local potential v0 ad δ(r−Ri ).
(Here a is a constant, of dimensionality [length], identiﬁed roughly with the extension of
the impurity.)
                                                  5.5 Problems                                                235

  Our aim is to compute the single-particle Green function Gn (r − r ) ≡ c†n (r)cn (r ) imp
where n is a Matsubara frequency index and the conﬁgurational average . . . imp ≡
        
L−dNimp i dd Ri is deﬁned by integration over all impurity coordinates.
(a) To begin, let us consider scattering from a single impurity (i.e. Nimp = 1). By developing
    a perturbative expansion in the impurity potential, show that the Green function can
    be written as Ĝn = Ĝ0,n + Ĝ0,n T̂n Ĝ0,n , where
               T̂n = Ĥimp + Ĥimp Ĝ0,n Ĥimp + Ĥimp Ĝ0,n Ĥimp Ĝ0,n Ĥimp + · · · imp ,               (5.47)
    denotes the T-matrix,36 and Ĝn = {Gn (r − r )}. Show that the T-matrix equation is
                                                               −1
    solved by Tn (r, r ) = δ(r − r )L−d (v0 ad )−1 − G0,n (0)     .
(b) For a collection of random impurities, the capacity for multiple scattering makes the
    concept of the T-matrix deﬁned for the full operator Ĥimp unilluminating. Instead, one
    would like to ﬁnd an expression for the conﬁgurational average of the Green function
    involving the T-matrix of a single isolated impurity. Presenting the Green function as
    a series expansion in the impurity potential v, enumerate and classify the contributions
    entering the conﬁgurational average up to third order in v. Organising the series at this
    order in a diagrammatic expansion, show that a subset (all but one) of the diagrams can
    be incorporated into a Dyson series expansion, Gk = G0,k +G0,k Σk Gk , where Gk ≡ Gn,k
    denotes the Green function in a four-momentum representation, Σk = Nimp k|T̂n |k is
    the self-energy and T̂n represents the T-matrix for a single isolated impurity.
       The Dyson series expansion can be inverted to give Gk = (iωn − ξk − Σk )−1 . When
    Fourier transformed back to time/space, one may note that the imaginary part of the
    self-energy can be associated with (one half of) the scattering rate, ImΣk = − 2τ   1
                                                                                          sgn(n)
    (cf. the Info block on page 379 for further discussion of this point). To understand the
    sign factor sgn(n), notice that the imaginary part of Tn is determined by the imaginary
    part of G0,n . However, it is straightforward to verify that sgn(ImG0,n ) ∝ sgnn. (For
    a comprehensive discussion of the analyticity properties of the self-energy, we refer to
    Chapter 7.)
(c) Sometimes, one is interested in the T-matrix for a ﬁxed (unaveraged) pattern of dilute
    impurities. In this case, the single-impurity T-matrix is given by the right hand side of
    Eq. (5.47), without the averaging brackets; it is no longer diagonal in momentum space,
    i.e. T̂n = { k|T̂n |k } = {Tn,kk }.
       Making use of the operator identity (1− Ô2 )−1 −(1− Ô1 )−1 = (1− Ô2 )−1 (Ô2 − Ô1 )(1−
    Ô1 )−1 , and deﬁning the real-frequency analytical continuation T̂ ± () ≡ T̂ (iωn →  ± iδ)
    (the same for Ĝ) show that
                                                                          −
                               T̂ + () − T̂ − () = T̂ − ()(Ĝ+
                                                                0 () − Ĝ0 ())T̂ ().
                                                                                  +
                                                                                                           (5.48)
      Using this result, show that the scattering rate is given by
                     1                           
                        ≡ Im Σ( = k + i0) = π      | k |T̂ + (k )|k |2 δ(k − k ).                   (5.49)
                    2τ                                     k


36
     For a discussion of the physical content of the T-matrix and its connection to the scattering matrix, we refer
     to any elementary text on scattering theory.
